LINE 1: [Illustration]
LINE 2: Elizabeth was sitting with her mother and sisters, reflecting on what
LINE 3: she had heard, and doubting whether she was authorized to mention it,
LINE 4: when Sir William Lucas himself appeared, sent by his daughter to
LINE 5: announce her engagement to the family. With many compliments to them,
LINE 6: and much self-gratulation on the prospect of a connection between the
LINE 7: houses, he unfolded the matter,--to an audience not merely wondering,
LINE 8: but incredulous; for Mrs. Bennet, with more perseverance than
LINE 9: politeness, protested he must be entirely mistaken; and Lydia, always
LINE 10: unguarded and often uncivil, boisterously exclaimed,--
LINE 11: "Good Lord! Sir William, how can you tell such a story? Do not you know
LINE 12: that Mr. Collins wants to marry Lizzy?"
LINE 13: Nothing less than the complaisance of a courtier could have borne
LINE 14: without anger such treatment: but Sir William's good-breeding carried
LINE 15: him through it all; and though he begged leave to be positive as to the
LINE 16: truth of his information, he listened to all their impertinence with the
LINE 17: most forbearing courtesy.
LINE 18: Elizabeth, feeling it incumbent on her to relieve him from so unpleasant
LINE 19: a situation, now put herself forward to confirm his account, by
LINE 20: mentioning her prior knowledge of it from Charlotte herself; and
LINE 21: endeavoured to put a stop to the exclamations of her mother and sisters,
LINE 22: by the earnestness of her congratulations to Sir William, in which she
LINE 23: was readily joined by Jane, and by making a variety of remarks on the
LINE 24: happiness that might be expected from the match, the excellent character
LINE 25: of Mr. Collins, and the convenient distance of Hunsford from London.
LINE 26: Mrs. Bennet was, in fact, too much overpowered to say a great deal while
LINE 27: Sir William remained; but no sooner had he left them than her feelings
LINE 28: found a rapid vent. In the first place, she persisted in disbelieving
LINE 29: the whole of the matter; secondly, she was very sure that Mr. Collins
LINE 30: had been taken in; thirdly, she trusted that they would never be happy
LINE 31: together; and, fourthly, that the match might be broken off. Two
LINE 32: inferences, however, were plainly deduced from the whole: one, that
LINE 33: Elizabeth was the real cause of all the mischief; and the other, that
LINE 34: she herself had been barbarously used by them all; and on these two
LINE 35: points she principally dwelt during the rest of the day. Nothing could
LINE 36: console and nothing appease her. Nor did that day wear out her
LINE 37: resentment. A week elapsed before she could see Elizabeth without
LINE 38: scolding her: a month passed away before she could speak to Sir William
LINE 39: or Lady Lucas without being rude; and many months were gone before she
LINE 40: could at all forgive their daughter.
LINE 41: Mr. Bennet's emotions were much more tranquil on the occasion, and such
LINE 42: as he did experience he pronounced to be of a most agreeable sort; for
LINE 43: it gratified him, he said, to discover that Charlotte Lucas, whom he had
LINE 44: been used to think tolerably sensible, was as foolish as his wife, and
LINE 45: more foolish than his daughter!
LINE 46: Jane confessed herself a little surprised at the match: but she said
LINE 47: less of her astonishment than of her earnest desire for their happiness;
LINE 48: nor could Elizabeth persuade her to consider it as improbable. Kitty and
LINE 49: Lydia were far from envying Miss Lucas, for Mr. Collins was only a
LINE 50: clergyman; and it affected them in no other way than as a piece of news
LINE 51: to spread at Meryton.
LINE 52: Lady Lucas could not be insensible of triumph on being able to retort on
LINE 53: Mrs. Bennet the comfort of having a daughter well married; and she
LINE 54: called at Longbourn rather oftener than usual to say how happy she was,
LINE 55: though Mrs. Bennet's sour looks and ill-natured remarks might have been
LINE 56: enough to drive happiness away.
LINE 57: Between Elizabeth and Charlotte there was a restraint which kept them
LINE 58: mutually silent on the subject; and Elizabeth felt persuaded that no
LINE 59: real confidence could ever subsist between them again. Her
LINE 60: disappointment in Charlotte made her turn with fonder regard to her
LINE 61: sister, of whose rectitude and delicacy she was sure her opinion could
LINE 62: never be shaken, and for whose happiness she grew daily more anxious, as
LINE 63: Bingley had now been gone a week, and nothing was heard of his return.
LINE 64: Jane had sent Caroline an early answer to her letter, and was counting
LINE 65: the days till she might reasonably hope to hear again. The promised
LINE 66: letter of thanks from Mr. Collins arrived on Tuesday, addressed to their
LINE 67: father, and written with all the solemnity of gratitude which a
LINE 68: twelve-month's abode in the family might have prompted. After
LINE 69: discharging his conscience on that head, he proceeded to inform them,
LINE 70: with many rapturous expressions, of his happiness in having obtained the
LINE 71: affection of their amiable neighbour, Miss Lucas, and then explained
LINE 72: that it was merely with the view of enjoying her society that he had
LINE 73: been so ready to close with their kind wish of seeing him again at
LINE 74: Longbourn, whither he hoped to be able to return on Monday fortnight;
LINE 75: for Lady Catherine, he added, so heartily approved his marriage, that
LINE 76: she wished it to take place as soon as possible, which he trusted would
LINE 77: be an unanswerable argument with his amiable Charlotte to name an early
LINE 78: day for making him the happiest of men.
LINE 79: Mr. Collins's return into Hertfordshire was no longer a matter of
LINE 80: pleasure to Mrs. Bennet. On the contrary, she was as much disposed to
LINE 81: complain of it as her husband. It was very strange that he should come
LINE 82: to Longbourn instead of to Lucas Lodge; it was also very inconvenient
LINE 83: and exceedingly troublesome. She hated having visitors in the house
LINE 84: while her health was so indifferent, and lovers were of all people the
LINE 85: most disagreeable. Such were the gentle murmurs of Mrs. Bennet, and they
LINE 86: gave way only to the greater distress of Mr. Bingley's continued
LINE 87: absence.
LINE 88: Neither Jane nor Elizabeth were comfortable on this subject. Day after
LINE 89: day passed away without bringing any other tidings of him than the
LINE 90: report which shortly prevailed in Meryton of his coming no more to
LINE 91: Netherfield the whole winter; a report which highly incensed Mrs.
LINE 92: Bennet, and which she never failed to contradict as a most scandalous
LINE 93: falsehood.
LINE 94: Even Elizabeth began to fear--not that Bingley was indifferent--but that
LINE 95: his sisters would be successful in keeping him away. Unwilling as she
LINE 96: was to admit an idea so destructive to Jane's happiness, and so
LINE 97: dishonourable to the stability of her lover, she could not prevent its
LINE 98: frequently recurring. The united efforts of his two unfeeling sisters,
LINE 99: and of his overpowering friend, assisted by the attractions of Miss
LINE 100: Darcy and the amusements of London, might be too much, she feared, for
LINE 101: the strength of his attachment.
LINE 102: As for Jane, _her_ anxiety under this suspense was, of course, more
LINE 103: painful than Elizabeth's: but whatever she felt she was desirous of
LINE 104: concealing; and between herself and Elizabeth, therefore, the subject
LINE 105: was never alluded to. But as no such delicacy restrained her mother, an
LINE 106: hour seldom passed in which she did not talk of Bingley, express her
LINE 107: impatience for his arrival, or even require Jane to confess that if he
LINE 108: did not come back she should think herself very ill-used. It needed all
LINE 109: Jane's steady mildness to bear these attacks with tolerable
LINE 110: tranquillity.
LINE 111: Mr. Collins returned most punctually on the Monday fortnight, but his
LINE 112: reception at Longbourn was not quite so gracious as it had been on his
LINE 113: first introduction. He was too happy, however, to need much attention;
LINE 114: and, luckily for the others, the business of love-making relieved them
LINE 115: from a great deal of his company. The chief of every day was spent by
LINE 116: him at Lucas Lodge, and he sometimes returned to Longbourn only in time
LINE 117: to make an apology for his absence before the family went to bed.
LINE 118: [Illustration:
LINE 119: "_Whenever she spoke in a low voice_"
LINE 120: ]
LINE 121: Mrs. Bennet was really in a most pitiable state. The very mention of
LINE 122: anything concerning the match threw her into an agony of ill-humour, and
LINE 123: wherever she went she was sure of hearing it talked of. The sight of
LINE 124: Miss Lucas was odious to her. As her successor in that house, she
LINE 125: regarded her with jealous abhorrence. Whenever Charlotte came to see
LINE 126: them, she concluded her to be anticipating the hour of possession; and
LINE 127: whenever she spoke in a low voice to Mr. Collins, was convinced that
LINE 128: they were talking of the Longbourn estate, and resolving to turn herself
LINE 129: and her daughters out of the house as soon as Mr. Bennet was dead. She
LINE 130: complained bitterly of all this to her husband.
LINE 131: "Indeed, Mr. Bennet," said she, "it is very hard to think that Charlotte
LINE 132: Lucas should ever be mistress of this house, that _I_ should be forced
LINE 133: to make way for _her_, and live to see her take my place in it!"
LINE 134: "My dear, do not give way to such gloomy thoughts. Let us hope for
LINE 135: better things. Let us flatter ourselves that _I_ may be the survivor."
LINE 136: This was not very consoling to Mrs. Bennet; and, therefore, instead of
LINE 137: making any answer, she went on as before.
LINE 138: "I cannot bear to think that they should have all this estate. If it was
LINE 139: not for the entail, I should not mind it."
LINE 140: "What should not you mind?"
LINE 141: "I should not mind anything at all."
LINE 142: "Let us be thankful that you are preserved from a state of such
LINE 143: insensibility."
LINE 144: "I never can be thankful, Mr. Bennet, for anything about the entail. How
LINE 145: anyone could have the conscience to entail away an estate from one's own
LINE 146: daughters I cannot understand; and all for the sake of Mr. Collins, too!
LINE 147: Why should _he_ have it more than anybody else?"
LINE 148: "I leave it to yourself to determine," said Mr. Bennet.
LINE 149: [Illustration]