LINE 1: [Illustration]
LINE 2: Convinced as Elizabeth now was that Miss Bingley's dislike of her had
LINE 3: originated in jealousy, she could not help feeling how very unwelcome
LINE 4: her appearance at Pemberley must be to her, and was curious to know
LINE 5: with how much civility on that lady's side the acquaintance would now
LINE 6: be renewed.
LINE 7: On reaching the house, they were shown through the hall into the saloon,
LINE 8: whose northern aspect rendered it delightful for summer. Its windows,
LINE 9: opening to the ground, admitted a most refreshing view of the high woody
LINE 10: hills behind the house, and of the beautiful oaks and Spanish chestnuts
LINE 11: which were scattered over the intermediate lawn.
LINE 12: In this room they were received by Miss Darcy, who was sitting there
LINE 13: with Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley, and the lady with whom she lived in
LINE 14: London. Georgiana's reception of them was very civil, but attended with
LINE 15: all that embarrassment which, though proceeding from shyness and the
LINE 16: fear of doing wrong, would easily give to those who felt themselves
LINE 17: inferior the belief of her being proud and reserved. Mrs. Gardiner and
LINE 18: her niece, however, did her justice, and pitied her.
LINE 19: By Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley they were noticed only by a courtesy; and
LINE 20: on their being seated, a pause, awkward as such pauses must always be,
LINE 21: succeeded for a few moments. It was first broken by Mrs. Annesley, a
LINE 22: genteel, agreeable-looking woman, whose endeavour to introduce some kind
LINE 23: of discourse proved her to be more truly well-bred than either of the
LINE 24: others; and between her and Mrs. Gardiner, with occasional help from
LINE 25: Elizabeth, the conversation was carried on. Miss Darcy looked as if she
LINE 26: wished for courage enough to join in it; and sometimes did venture a
LINE 27: short sentence, when there was least danger of its being heard.
LINE 28: Elizabeth soon saw that she was herself closely watched by Miss Bingley,
LINE 29: and that she could not speak a word, especially to Miss Darcy, without
LINE 30: calling her attention. This observation would not have prevented her
LINE 31: from trying to talk to the latter, had they not been seated at an
LINE 32: inconvenient distance; but she was not sorry to be spared the necessity
LINE 33: of saying much: her own thoughts were employing her. She expected every
LINE 34: moment that some of the gentlemen would enter the room: she wished, she
LINE 35: feared, that the master of the house might be amongst them; and whether
LINE 36: she wished or feared it most, she could scarcely determine. After
LINE 37: sitting in this manner a quarter of an hour, without hearing Miss
LINE 38: Bingley's voice, Elizabeth was roused by receiving from her a cold
LINE 39: inquiry after the health of her family. She answered with equal
LINE 40: indifference and brevity, and the other said no more.
LINE 41: The next variation which their visit afforded was produced by the
LINE 42: entrance of servants with cold meat, cake, and a variety of all the
LINE 43: finest fruits in season; but this did not take place till after many a
LINE 44: significant look and smile from Mrs. Annesley to Miss Darcy had been
LINE 45: given, to remind her of her post. There was now employment for the whole
LINE 46: party; for though they could not all talk, they could all eat; and the
LINE 47: beautiful pyramids of grapes, nectarines, and peaches, soon collected
LINE 48: them round the table.
LINE 49: While thus engaged, Elizabeth had a fair opportunity of deciding whether
LINE 50: she most feared or wished for the appearance of Mr. Darcy, by the
LINE 51: feelings which prevailed on his entering the room; and then, though but
LINE 52: a moment before she had believed her wishes to predominate, she began to
LINE 53: regret that he came.
LINE 54: He had been some time with Mr. Gardiner, who, with two or three other
LINE 55: gentlemen from the house, was engaged by the river; and had left him
LINE 56: only on learning that the ladies of the family intended a visit to
LINE 57: Georgiana that morning. No sooner did he appear, than Elizabeth wisely
LINE 58: resolved to be perfectly easy and unembarrassed;--a resolution the more
LINE 59: necessary to be made, but perhaps not the more easily kept, because she
LINE 60: saw that the suspicions of the whole party were awakened against them,
LINE 61: and that there was scarcely an eye which did not watch his behaviour
LINE 62: when he first came into the room. In no countenance was attentive
LINE 63: curiosity so strongly marked as in Miss Bingley's, in spite of the
LINE 64: smiles which overspread her face whenever she spoke to one of its
LINE 65: objects; for jealousy had not yet made her desperate, and her attentions
LINE 66: to Mr. Darcy were by no means over. Miss Darcy, on her brother's
LINE 67: entrance, exerted herself much more to talk; and Elizabeth saw that he
LINE 68: was anxious for his sister and herself to get acquainted, and forwarded,
LINE 69: as much as possible, every attempt at conversation on either side. Miss
LINE 70: Bingley saw all this likewise; and, in the imprudence of anger, took the
LINE 71: first opportunity of saying, with sneering civility,--
LINE 72: "Pray, Miss Eliza, are not the ----shire militia removed from Meryton?
LINE 73: They must be a great loss to _your_ family."
LINE 74: In Darcy's presence she dared not mention Wickham's name: but Elizabeth
LINE 75: instantly comprehended that he was uppermost in her thoughts; and the
LINE 76: various recollections connected with him gave her a moment's distress;
LINE 77: but, exerting herself vigorously to repel the ill-natured attack, she
LINE 78: presently answered the question in a tolerably disengaged tone. While
LINE 79: she spoke, an involuntary glance showed her Darcy with a heightened
LINE 80: complexion, earnestly looking at her, and his sister overcome with
LINE 81: confusion, and unable to lift up her eyes. Had Miss Bingley known what
LINE 82: pain she was then giving her beloved friend, she undoubtedly would have
LINE 83: refrained from the hint; but she had merely intended to discompose
LINE 84: Elizabeth, by bringing forward the idea of a man to whom she believed
LINE 85: her partial, to make her betray a sensibility which might injure her in
LINE 86: Darcy's opinion, and, perhaps, to remind the latter of all the follies
LINE 87: and absurdities by which some part of her family were connected with
LINE 88: that corps. Not a syllable had ever reached her of Miss Darcy's
LINE 89: meditated elopement. To no creature had it been revealed, where secrecy
LINE 90: was possible, except to Elizabeth; and from all Bingley's connections
LINE 91: her brother was particularly anxious to conceal it, from that very wish
LINE 92: which Elizabeth had long ago attributed to him, of their becoming
LINE 93: hereafter her own. He had certainly formed such a plan; and without
LINE 94: meaning that it should affect his endeavour to separate him from Miss
LINE 95: Bennet, it is probable that it might add something to his lively concern
LINE 96: for the welfare of his friend.
LINE 97: Elizabeth's collected behaviour, however, soon quieted his emotion; and
LINE 98: as Miss Bingley, vexed and disappointed, dared not approach nearer to
LINE 99: Wickham, Georgiana also recovered in time, though not enough to be able
LINE 100: to speak any more. Her brother, whose eye she feared to meet, scarcely
LINE 101: recollected her interest in the affair; and the very circumstance which
LINE 102: had been designed to turn his thoughts from Elizabeth, seemed to have
LINE 103: fixed them on her more and more cheerfully.
LINE 104: Their visit did not continue long after the question and answer above
LINE 105: mentioned; and while Mr. Darcy was attending them to their carriage,
LINE 106: Miss Bingley was venting her feelings in criticisms on Elizabeth's
LINE 107: person, behaviour, and dress. But Georgiana would not join her. Her
LINE 108: brother's recommendation was enough to insure her favour: his judgment
LINE 109: could not err; and he had spoken in such terms of Elizabeth, as to leave
LINE 110: Georgiana without the power of finding her otherwise than lovely and
LINE 111: amiable. When Darcy returned to the saloon, Miss Bingley could not help
LINE 112: repeating to him some part of what she had been saying to his sister.
LINE 113: "How very ill Eliza Bennet looks this morning, Mr. Darcy," she cried: "I
LINE 114: never in my life saw anyone so much altered as she is since the winter.
LINE 115: She is grown so brown and coarse! Louisa and I were agreeing that we
LINE 116: should not have known her again."
LINE 117: However little Mr. Darcy might have liked such an address, he contented
LINE 118: himself with coolly replying, that he perceived no other alteration than
LINE 119: her being rather tanned,--no miraculous consequence of travelling in the
LINE 120: summer.
LINE 121: "For my own part," she rejoined, "I must confess that I never could see
LINE 122: any beauty in her. Her face is too thin; her complexion has no
LINE 123: brilliancy; and her features are not at all handsome. Her nose wants
LINE 124: character; there is nothing marked in its lines. Her teeth are
LINE 125: tolerable, but not out of the common way; and as for her eyes, which
LINE 126: have sometimes been called so fine, I never could perceive anything
LINE 127: extraordinary in them. They have a sharp, shrewish look, which I do not
LINE 128: like at all; and in her air altogether, there is a self-sufficiency
LINE 129: without fashion, which is intolerable."
LINE 130: Persuaded as Miss Bingley was that Darcy admired Elizabeth, this was not
LINE 131: the best method of recommending herself; but angry people are not always
LINE 132: wise; and in seeing him at last look somewhat nettled, she had all the
LINE 133: success she expected. He was resolutely silent, however; and, from a
LINE 134: determination of making him speak, she continued,--
LINE 135: "I remember, when we first knew her in Hertfordshire, how amazed we all
LINE 136: were to find that she was a reputed beauty; and I particularly recollect
LINE 137: your saying one night, after they had been dining at Netherfield, '_She_
LINE 138: a beauty! I should as soon call her mother a wit.' But afterwards she
LINE 139: seemed to improve on you, and I believe you thought her rather pretty at
LINE 140: one time."
LINE 141: "Yes," replied Darcy, who could contain himself no longer, "but _that_
LINE 142: was only when I first knew her; for it is many months since I have
LINE 143: considered her as one of the handsomest women of my acquaintance."
LINE 144: He then went away, and Miss Bingley was left to all the satisfaction of
LINE 145: having forced him to say what gave no one any pain but herself.
LINE 146: Mrs. Gardiner and Elizabeth talked of all that had occurred during their
LINE 147: visit, as they returned, except what had particularly interested them
LINE 148: both. The looks and behaviour of everybody they had seen were discussed,
LINE 149: except of the person who had mostly engaged their attention. They talked
LINE 150: of his sister, his friends, his house, his fruit, of everything but
LINE 151: himself; yet Elizabeth was longing to know what Mrs. Gardiner thought of
LINE 152: him, and Mrs. Gardiner would have been highly gratified by her niece's
LINE 153: beginning the subject.
LINE 154: [Illustration]