LINE 1: [Illustration]
LINE 2: Happy for all her maternal feelings was the day on which Mrs. Bennet got
LINE 3: rid of her two most deserving daughters. With what delighted pride she
LINE 4: afterwards visited Mrs. Bingley, and talked of Mrs. Darcy, may be
LINE 5: guessed. I wish I could say, for the sake of her family, that the
LINE 6: accomplishment of her earnest desire in the establishment of so many of
LINE 7: her children produced so happy an effect as to make her a sensible,
LINE 8: amiable, well-informed woman for the rest of her life; though, perhaps,
LINE 9: it was lucky for her husband, who might not have relished domestic
LINE 10: felicity in so unusual a form, that she still was occasionally nervous
LINE 11: and invariably silly.
LINE 12: Mr. Bennet missed his second daughter exceedingly; his affection for her
LINE 13: drew him oftener from home than anything else could do. He delighted in
LINE 14: going to Pemberley, especially when he was least expected.
LINE 15: Mr. Bingley and Jane remained at Netherfield only a twelvemonth. So near
LINE 16: a vicinity to her mother and Meryton relations was not desirable even to
LINE 17: _his_ easy temper, or _her_ affectionate heart. The darling wish of his
LINE 18: sisters was then gratified: he bought an estate in a neighbouring county
LINE 19: to Derbyshire; and Jane and Elizabeth, in addition to every other source
LINE 20: of happiness, were within thirty miles of each other.
LINE 21: Kitty, to her very material advantage, spent the chief of her time with
LINE 22: her two elder sisters. In society so superior to what she had generally
LINE 23: known, her improvement was great. She was not of so ungovernable a
LINE 24: temper as Lydia; and, removed from the influence of Lydia's example, she
LINE 25: became, by proper attention and management, less irritable, less
LINE 26: ignorant, and less insipid. From the further disadvantage of Lydia's
LINE 27: society she was of course carefully kept; and though Mrs. Wickham
LINE 28: frequently invited her to come and stay with her, with the promise of
LINE 29: balls and young men, her father would never consent to her going.
LINE 30: Mary was the only daughter who remained at home; and she was necessarily
LINE 31: drawn from the pursuit of accomplishments by Mrs. Bennet's being quite
LINE 32: unable to sit alone. Mary was obliged to mix more with the world, but
LINE 33: she could still moralize over every morning visit; and as she was no
LINE 34: longer mortified by comparisons between her sisters' beauty and her own,
LINE 35: it was suspected by her father that she submitted to the change without
LINE 36: much reluctance.
LINE 37: As for Wickham and Lydia, their characters suffered no revolution from
LINE 38: the marriage of her sisters. He bore with philosophy the conviction that
LINE 39: Elizabeth must now become acquainted with whatever of his ingratitude
LINE 40: and falsehood had before been unknown to her; and, in spite of
LINE 41: everything, was not wholly without hope that Darcy might yet be
LINE 42: prevailed on to make his fortune. The congratulatory letter which
LINE 43: Elizabeth received from Lydia on her marriage explained to her that, by
LINE 44: his wife at least, if not by himself, such a hope was cherished. The
LINE 45: letter was to this effect:--
LINE 46: /* "My dear Lizzy, */
LINE 47: "I wish you joy. If you love Mr. Darcy half so well as I do my dear
LINE 48: Wickham, you must be very happy. It is a great comfort to have you
LINE 49: so rich; and when you have nothing else to do, I hope you will
LINE 50: think of us. I am sure Wickham would like a place at court very
LINE 51: much; and I do not think we shall have quite money enough to live
LINE 52: upon without some help. Any place would do of about three or four
LINE 53: hundred a year; but, however, do not speak to Mr. Darcy about it,
LINE 54: if you had rather not.
LINE 55: "Yours," etc.
LINE 56: As it happened that Elizabeth had much rather not, she endeavoured in
LINE 57: her answer to put an end to every entreaty and expectation of the kind.
LINE 58: Such relief, however, as it was in her power to afford, by the practice
LINE 59: of what might be called economy in her own private expenses, she
LINE 60: frequently sent them. It had always been evident to her that such an
LINE 61: income as theirs, under the direction of two persons so extravagant in
LINE 62: their wants, and heedless of the future, must be very insufficient to
LINE 63: their support; and whenever they changed their quarters, either Jane or
LINE 64: herself were sure of being applied to for some little assistance towards
LINE 65: discharging their bills. Their manner of living, even when the
LINE 66: restoration of peace dismissed them to a home, was unsettled in the
LINE 67: extreme. They were always moving from place to place in quest of a
LINE 68: cheap situation, and always spending more than they ought. His affection
LINE 69: for her soon sunk into indifference: hers lasted a little longer; and,
LINE 70: in spite of her youth and her manners, she retained all the claims to
LINE 71: reputation which her marriage had given her. Though Darcy could never
LINE 72: receive _him_ at Pemberley, yet, for Elizabeth's sake, he assisted him
LINE 73: further in his profession. Lydia was occasionally a visitor there, when
LINE 74: her husband was gone to enjoy himself in London or Bath; and with the
LINE 75: Bingleys they both of them frequently stayed so long, that even
LINE 76: Bingley's good-humour was overcome, and he proceeded so far as to _talk_
LINE 77: of giving them a hint to be gone.
LINE 78: Miss Bingley was very deeply mortified by Darcy's marriage; but as she
LINE 79: thought it advisable to retain the right of visiting at Pemberley, she
LINE 80: dropped all her resentment; was fonder than ever of Georgiana, almost as
LINE 81: attentive to Darcy as heretofore, and paid off every arrear of civility
LINE 82: to Elizabeth.
LINE 83: Pemberley was now Georgiana's home; and the attachment of the sisters
LINE 84: was exactly what Darcy had hoped to see. They were able to love each
LINE 85: other, even as well as they intended. Georgiana had the highest opinion
LINE 86: in the world of Elizabeth; though at first she often listened with an
LINE 87: astonishment bordering on alarm at her lively, sportive manner of
LINE 88: talking to her brother. He, who had always inspired in herself a respect
LINE 89: which almost overcame her affection, she now saw the object of open
LINE 90: pleasantry. Her mind received knowledge which had never before fallen in
LINE 91: her way. By Elizabeth's instructions she began to comprehend that a
LINE 92: woman may take liberties with her husband, which a brother will not
LINE 93: always allow in a sister more than ten years younger than himself.
LINE 94: Lady Catherine was extremely indignant on the marriage of her nephew;
LINE 95: and as she gave way to all the genuine frankness of her character, in
LINE 96: her reply to the letter which announced its arrangement, she sent him
LINE 97: language so very abusive, especially of Elizabeth, that for some time
LINE 98: all intercourse was at an end. But at length, by Elizabeth's persuasion,
LINE 99: he was prevailed on to overlook the offence, and seek a reconciliation;
LINE 100: and, after a little further resistance on the part of his aunt, her
LINE 101: resentment gave way, either to her affection for him, or her curiosity
LINE 102: to see how his wife conducted herself; and she condescended to wait on
LINE 103: them at Pemberley, in spite of that pollution which its woods had
LINE 104: received, not merely from the presence of such a mistress, but the
LINE 105: visits of her uncle and aunt from the city.
LINE 106: With the Gardiners they were always on the most intimate terms. Darcy,
LINE 107: as well as Elizabeth, really loved them; and they were both ever
LINE 108: sensible of the warmest gratitude towards the persons who, by bringing
LINE 109: her into Derbyshire, had been the means of uniting them.