LINE 1: [Illustration]
LINE 2: Elizabeth, when Mr. Darcy gave her the letter, did not expect it to
LINE 3: contain a renewal of his offers, she had formed no expectation at all of
LINE 4: its contents. But such as they were, it may be well supposed how eagerly
LINE 5: she went through them, and what a contrariety of emotion they excited.
LINE 6: Her feelings as she read were scarcely to be defined. With amazement did
LINE 7: she first understand that he believed any apology to be in his power;
LINE 8: and steadfastly was she persuaded, that he could have no explanation to
LINE 9: give, which a just sense of shame would not conceal. With a strong
LINE 10: prejudice against everything he might say, she began his account of
LINE 11: what had happened at Netherfield. She read with an eagerness which
LINE 12: hardly left her power of comprehension; and from impatience of knowing
LINE 13: what the next sentence might bring, was incapable of attending to the
LINE 14: sense of the one before her eyes. His belief of her sister's
LINE 15: insensibility she instantly resolved to be false; and his account of the
LINE 16: real, the worst objections to the match, made her too angry to have any
LINE 17: wish of doing him justice. He expressed no regret for what he had done
LINE 18: which satisfied her; his style was not penitent, but haughty. It was all
LINE 19: pride and insolence.
LINE 20: But when this subject was succeeded by his account of Mr. Wickham--when
LINE 21: she read, with somewhat clearer attention, a relation of events which,
LINE 22: if true, must overthrow every cherished opinion of his worth, and which
LINE 23: bore so alarming an affinity to his own history of himself--her feelings
LINE 24: were yet more acutely painful and more difficult of definition.
LINE 25: Astonishment, apprehension, and even horror, oppressed her. She wished
LINE 26: to discredit it entirely, repeatedly exclaiming, "This must be false!
LINE 27: This cannot be! This must be the grossest falsehood!"--and when she had
LINE 28: gone through the whole letter, though scarcely knowing anything of the
LINE 29: last page or two, put it hastily away, protesting that she would not
LINE 30: regard it, that she would never look in it again.
LINE 31: In this perturbed state of mind, with thoughts that could rest on
LINE 32: nothing, she walked on; but it would not do: in half a minute the letter
LINE 33: was unfolded again; and collecting herself as well as she could, she
LINE 34: again began the mortifying perusal of all that related to Wickham, and
LINE 35: commanded herself so far as to examine the meaning of every sentence.
LINE 36: The account of his connection with the Pemberley family was exactly
LINE 37: what he had related himself; and the kindness of the late Mr. Darcy,
LINE 38: though she had not before known its extent, agreed equally well with his
LINE 39: own words. So far each recital confirmed the other; but when she came to
LINE 40: the will, the difference was great. What Wickham had said of the living
LINE 41: was fresh in her memory; and as she recalled his very words, it was
LINE 42: impossible not to feel that there was gross duplicity on one side or the
LINE 43: other, and, for a few moments, she flattered herself that her wishes did
LINE 44: not err. But when she read and re-read, with the closest attention, the
LINE 45: particulars immediately following of Wickham's resigning all pretensions
LINE 46: to the living, of his receiving in lieu so considerable a sum as three
LINE 47: thousand pounds, again was she forced to hesitate. She put down the
LINE 48: letter, weighed every circumstance with what she meant to be
LINE 49: impartiality--deliberated on the probability of each statement--but with
LINE 50: little success. On both sides it was only assertion. Again she read on.
LINE 51: But every line proved more clearly that the affair, which she had
LINE 52: believed it impossible that any contrivance could so represent as to
LINE 53: render Mr. Darcy's conduct in it less than infamous, was capable of a
LINE 54: turn which must make him entirely blameless throughout the whole.
LINE 55: The extravagance and general profligacy which he scrupled not to lay to
LINE 56: Mr. Wickham's charge exceedingly shocked her; the more so, as she could
LINE 57: bring no proof of its injustice. She had never heard of him before his
LINE 58: entrance into the ----shire militia, in which he had engaged at the
LINE 59: persuasion of the young man, who, on meeting him accidentally in town,
LINE 60: had there renewed a slight acquaintance. Of his former way of life,
LINE 61: nothing had been known in Hertfordshire but what he told
LINE 62: [Illustration:
LINE 63: "Meeting accidentally in Town"
LINE 64: [_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]
LINE 65: himself. As to his real character, had information been in her power,
LINE 66: she had never felt a wish of inquiring. His countenance, voice, and
LINE 67: manner, had established him at once in the possession of every virtue.
LINE 68: She tried to recollect some instance of goodness, some distinguished
LINE 69: trait of integrity or benevolence, that might rescue him from the
LINE 70: attacks of Mr. Darcy; or at least, by the predominance of virtue, atone
LINE 71: for those casual errors, under which she would endeavour to class what
LINE 72: Mr. Darcy had described as the idleness and vice of many years'
LINE 73: continuance. But no such recollection befriended her. She could see him
LINE 74: instantly before her, in every charm of air and address, but she could
LINE 75: remember no more substantial good than the general approbation of the
LINE 76: neighbourhood, and the regard which his social powers had gained him in
LINE 77: the mess. After pausing on this point a considerable while, she once
LINE 78: more continued to read. But, alas! the story which followed, of his
LINE 79: designs on Miss Darcy, received some confirmation from what had passed
LINE 80: between Colonel Fitzwilliam and herself only the morning before; and at
LINE 81: last she was referred for the truth of every particular to Colonel
LINE 82: Fitzwilliam himself--from whom she had previously received the
LINE 83: information of his near concern in all his cousin's affairs and whose
LINE 84: character she had no reason to question. At one time she had almost
LINE 85: resolved on applying to him, but the idea was checked by the awkwardness
LINE 86: of the application, and at length wholly banished by the conviction that
LINE 87: Mr. Darcy would never have hazarded such a proposal, if he had not been
LINE 88: well assured of his cousin's corroboration.
LINE 89: She perfectly remembered everything that had passed in conversation
LINE 90: between Wickham and herself in their first evening at Mr. Philips's.
LINE 91: Many of his expressions were still fresh in her memory. She was _now_
LINE 92: struck with the impropriety of such communications to a stranger, and
LINE 93: wondered it had escaped her before. She saw the indelicacy of putting
LINE 94: himself forward as he had done, and the inconsistency of his professions
LINE 95: with his conduct. She remembered that he had boasted of having no fear
LINE 96: of seeing Mr. Darcy--that Mr. Darcy might leave the country, but that
LINE 97: _he_ should stand his ground; yet he had avoided the Netherfield ball
LINE 98: the very next week. She remembered, also, that till the Netherfield
LINE 99: family had quitted the country, he had told his story to no one but
LINE 100: herself; but that after their removal, it had been everywhere discussed;
LINE 101: that he had then no reserves, no scruples in sinking Mr. Darcy's
LINE 102: character, though he had assured her that respect for the father would
LINE 103: always prevent his exposing the son.
LINE 104: How differently did everything now appear in which he was concerned! His
LINE 105: attentions to Miss King were now the consequence of views solely and
LINE 106: hatefully mercenary; and the mediocrity of her fortune proved no longer
LINE 107: the moderation of his wishes, but his eagerness to grasp at anything.
LINE 108: His behaviour to herself could now have had no tolerable motive: he had
LINE 109: either been deceived with regard to her fortune, or had been gratifying
LINE 110: his vanity by encouraging the preference which she believed she had most
LINE 111: incautiously shown. Every lingering struggle in his favour grew fainter
LINE 112: and fainter; and in further justification of Mr. Darcy, she could not
LINE 113: but allow that Mr. Bingley, when questioned by Jane, had long ago
LINE 114: asserted his blamelessness in the affair;--that, proud and repulsive as
LINE 115: were his manners, she had never, in the whole course of their
LINE 116: acquaintance--an acquaintance which had latterly brought them much
LINE 117: together, and given her a sort of intimacy with his ways--seen anything
LINE 118: that betrayed him to be unprincipled or unjust--anything that spoke him
LINE 119: of irreligious or immoral habits;--that among his own connections he was
LINE 120: esteemed and valued;--that even Wickham had allowed him merit as a
LINE 121: brother, and that she had often heard him speak so affectionately of his
LINE 122: sister as to prove him capable of some amiable feeling;--that had his
LINE 123: actions been what Wickham represented them, so gross a violation of
LINE 124: everything right could hardly have been concealed from the world; and
LINE 125: that friendship between a person capable of it and such an amiable man
LINE 126: as Mr. Bingley was incomprehensible.
LINE 127: She grew absolutely ashamed of herself. Of neither Darcy nor Wickham
LINE 128: could she think, without feeling that she had been blind, partial,
LINE 129: prejudiced, absurd.
LINE 130: "How despicably have I acted!" she cried. "I, who have prided myself on
LINE 131: my discernment! I, who have valued myself on my abilities! who have
LINE 132: often disdained the generous candour of my sister, and gratified my
LINE 133: vanity in useless or blameless distrust. How humiliating is this
LINE 134: discovery! Yet, how just a humiliation! Had I been in love, I could not
LINE 135: have been more wretchedly blind. But vanity, not love, has been my
LINE 136: folly. Pleased with the preference of one, and offended by the neglect
LINE 137: of the other, on the very beginning of our acquaintance, I have courted
LINE 138: prepossession and ignorance, and driven reason away where either were
LINE 139: concerned. Till this moment, I never knew myself."
LINE 140: From herself to Jane, from Jane to Bingley, her thoughts were in a line
LINE 141: which soon brought to her recollection that Mr. Darcy's explanation
LINE 142: _there_ had appeared very insufficient; and she read it again. Widely
LINE 143: different was the effect of a second perusal. How could she deny that
LINE 144: credit to his assertions, in one instance, which she had been obliged to
LINE 145: give in the other? He declared himself to have been totally unsuspicious
LINE 146: of her sister's attachment; and she could not help remembering what
LINE 147: Charlotte's opinion had always been. Neither could she deny the justice
LINE 148: of his description of Jane. She felt that Jane's feelings, though
LINE 149: fervent, were little displayed, and that there was a constant
LINE 150: complacency in her air and manner, not often united with great
LINE 151: sensibility.
LINE 152: When she came to that part of the letter in which her family were
LINE 153: mentioned, in tones of such mortifying, yet merited, reproach, her sense
LINE 154: of shame was severe. The justice of the charge struck her too forcibly
LINE 155: for denial; and the circumstances to which he particularly alluded, as
LINE 156: having passed at the Netherfield ball, and as confirming all his first
LINE 157: disapprobation, could not have made a stronger impression on his mind
LINE 158: than on hers.
LINE 159: The compliment to herself and her sister was not unfelt. It soothed, but
LINE 160: it could not console her for the contempt which had been thus
LINE 161: self-attracted by the rest of her family; and as she considered that
LINE 162: Jane's disappointment had, in fact, been the work of her nearest
LINE 163: relations, and reflected how materially the credit of both must be hurt
LINE 164: by such impropriety of conduct, she felt depressed beyond anything she
LINE 165: had ever known before.
LINE 166: After wandering along the lane for two hours, giving way to every
LINE 167: variety of thought, reconsidering events, determining probabilities, and
LINE 168: reconciling herself, as well as she could, to a change so sudden and so
LINE 169: important, fatigue, and a recollection of her long absence, made her at
LINE 170: length return home; and she entered the house with the wish of appearing
LINE 171: cheerful as usual, and the resolution of repressing such reflections as
LINE 172: must make her unfit for conversation.
LINE 173: She was immediately told, that the two gentlemen from Rosings had each
LINE 174: called during her absence; Mr. Darcy, only for a few minutes, to take
LINE 175: leave, but that Colonel Fitzwilliam had been sitting with them at least
LINE 176: an hour, hoping for her return, and almost resolving to walk after her
LINE 177: till she could be found. Elizabeth could but just _affect_ concern in
LINE 178: missing him; she really rejoiced at it. Colonel Fitzwilliam was no
LINE 179: longer an object. She could think only of her letter.
LINE 180: [Illustration:
LINE 181: "His parting obeisance"
LINE 182: ]