LINE 1: [Illustration]
LINE 2: Colonel Fitzwilliam's manners were very much admired at the Parsonage,
LINE 3: and the ladies all felt that he must add considerably to the pleasure of
LINE 4: their engagements at Rosings. It was some days, however, before they
LINE 5: received any invitation thither, for while there were visitors in the
LINE 6: house they could not be necessary; and it was not till Easter-day,
LINE 7: almost a week after the gentlemen's arrival, that they were honoured by
LINE 8: such an attention, and then they were merely asked on leaving church to
LINE 9: come there in the evening. For the last week they had seen very little
LINE 10: of either Lady Catherine or her daughter. Colonel Fitzwilliam had called
LINE 11: at the Parsonage more than once during the time, but Mr. Darcy they had
LINE 12: only seen at church.
LINE 13: The invitation was accepted, of course, and at a proper hour they joined
LINE 14: the party in Lady Catherine's drawing-room. Her Ladyship received them
LINE 15: civilly, but it was plain that their company was by no means so
LINE 16: acceptable as when she could get nobody else; and she was, in fact,
LINE 17: almost engrossed by her nephews, speaking to them, especially to Darcy,
LINE 18: much more than to any other person in the room.
LINE 19: Colonel Fitzwilliam seemed really glad to see them: anything was a
LINE 20: welcome relief to him at Rosings; and Mrs. Collins's pretty friend had,
LINE 21: moreover, caught his fancy very much. He now seated himself by her, and
LINE 22: talked so agreeably of Kent and Hertfordshire, of travelling and staying
LINE 23: at home, of new books and music, that Elizabeth had never been half so
LINE 24: well entertained in that room before; and they conversed with so much
LINE 25: spirit and flow as to draw the attention of Lady Catherine herself, as
LINE 26: well as of Mr. Darcy. _His_ eyes had been soon and repeatedly turned
LINE 27: towards them with a look of curiosity; and that her Ladyship, after a
LINE 28: while, shared the feeling, was more openly acknowledged, for she did not
LINE 29: scruple to call out,--
LINE 30: "What is that you are saying, Fitzwilliam? What is it you are talking
LINE 31: of? What are you telling Miss Bennet? Let me hear what it is."
LINE 32: "We were talking of music, madam," said he, when no longer able to avoid
LINE 33: a reply.
LINE 34: "Of music! Then pray speak aloud. It is of all subjects my delight. I
LINE 35: must have my share in the conversation, if you are speaking of music.
LINE 36: There are few people in England, I suppose, who have more true
LINE 37: enjoyment of music than myself, or a better natural taste. If I had ever
LINE 38: learnt, I should have been a great proficient. And so would Anne, if her
LINE 39: health had allowed her to apply. I am confident that she would have
LINE 40: performed delightfully. How does Georgiana get on, Darcy?"
LINE 41: Mr. Darcy spoke with affectionate praise of his sister's proficiency.
LINE 42: "I am very glad to hear such a good account of her," said Lady
LINE 43: Catherine; "and pray tell her from me, that she cannot expect to excel,
LINE 44: if she does not practise a great deal."
LINE 45: "I assure you, madam," he replied, "that she does not need such advice.
LINE 46: She practises very constantly."
LINE 47: "So much the better. It cannot be done too much; and when I next write
LINE 48: to her, I shall charge her not to neglect it on any account. I often
LINE 49: tell young ladies, that no excellence in music is to be acquired without
LINE 50: constant practice. I have told Miss Bennet several times, that she will
LINE 51: never play really well, unless she practises more; and though Mrs.
LINE 52: Collins has no instrument, she is very welcome, as I have often told
LINE 53: her, to come to Rosings every day, and play on the pianoforte in Mrs.
LINE 54: Jenkinson's room. She would be in nobody's way, you know, in that part
LINE 55: of the house."
LINE 56: Mr. Darcy looked a little ashamed of his aunt's ill-breeding, and made
LINE 57: no answer.
LINE 58: When coffee was over, Colonel Fitzwilliam reminded Elizabeth of having
LINE 59: promised to play to him; and she sat down directly to the instrument. He
LINE 60: drew a chair near her. Lady Catherine listened to half a song, and then
LINE 61: talked, as before, to her other nephew; till the latter walked away from
LINE 62: her, and moving with his usual deliberation towards the pianoforte,
LINE 63: stationed himself so as to command a full view of the fair performer's
LINE 64: countenance. Elizabeth saw what he was doing, and at the first
LINE 65: convenient pause turned to him with an arch smile, and said,--
LINE 66: "You mean to frighten me, Mr. Darcy, by coming in all this state to hear
LINE 67: me. But I will not be alarmed, though your sister _does_ play so well.
LINE 68: There is a stubbornness about me that never can bear to be frightened at
LINE 69: the will of others. My courage always rises with every attempt to
LINE 70: intimidate me."
LINE 71: "I shall not say that you are mistaken," he replied, "because you could
LINE 72: not really believe me to entertain any design of alarming you; and I
LINE 73: have had the pleasure of your acquaintance long enough to know, that you
LINE 74: find great enjoyment in occasionally professing opinions which, in fact,
LINE 75: are not your own."
LINE 76: Elizabeth laughed heartily at this picture of herself, and said to
LINE 77: Colonel Fitzwilliam, "Your cousin will give you a very pretty notion of
LINE 78: me, and teach you not to believe a word I say. I am particularly unlucky
LINE 79: in meeting with a person so well able to expose my real character, in a
LINE 80: part of the world where I had hoped to pass myself off with some degree
LINE 81: of credit. Indeed, Mr. Darcy, it is very ungenerous in you to mention
LINE 82: all that you knew to my disadvantage in Hertfordshire--and, give me
LINE 83: leave to say, very impolitic too--for it is provoking me to retaliate,
LINE 84: and such things may come out as will shock your relations to hear."
LINE 85: "I am not afraid of you," said he, smilingly.
LINE 86: "Pray let me hear what you have to accuse him of," cried Colonel
LINE 87: Fitzwilliam. "I should like to know how he behaves among strangers."
LINE 88: "You shall hear, then--but prepare for something very dreadful. The
LINE 89: first time of my ever seeing him in Hertfordshire, you must know, was at
LINE 90: a ball--and at this ball, what do you think he did? He danced only four
LINE 91: dances! I am sorry to pain you, but so it was. He danced only four
LINE 92: dances, though gentlemen were scarce; and, to my certain knowledge, more
LINE 93: than one young lady was sitting down in want of a partner. Mr. Darcy,
LINE 94: you cannot deny the fact."
LINE 95: "I had not at that time the honour of knowing any lady in the assembly
LINE 96: beyond my own party."
LINE 97: "True; and nobody can ever be introduced in a ball-room. Well, Colonel
LINE 98: Fitzwilliam, what do I play next? My fingers wait your orders."
LINE 99: "Perhaps," said Darcy, "I should have judged better had I sought an
LINE 100: introduction, but I am ill-qualified to recommend myself to strangers."
LINE 101: "Shall we ask your cousin the reason of this?" said Elizabeth, still
LINE 102: addressing Colonel Fitzwilliam. "Shall we ask him why a man of sense and
LINE 103: education, and who has lived in the world, is ill-qualified to recommend
LINE 104: himself to strangers?"
LINE 105: "I can answer your question," said Fitzwilliam, "without applying to
LINE 106: him. It is because he will not give himself the trouble."
LINE 107: "I certainly have not the talent which some people possess," said Darcy,
LINE 108: "of conversing easily with those I have never seen before. I cannot
LINE 109: catch their tone of conversation, or appear interested in their
LINE 110: concerns, as I often see done."
LINE 111: "My fingers," said Elizabeth, "do not move over this instrument in the
LINE 112: masterly manner which I see so many women's do. They have not the same
LINE 113: force or rapidity, and do not produce the same expression. But then I
LINE 114: have always supposed it to be my own fault--because I would not take
LINE 115: the trouble of practising. It is not that I do not believe _my_ fingers
LINE 116: as capable as any other woman's of superior execution."
LINE 117: Darcy smiled and said, "You are perfectly right. You have employed your
LINE 118: time much better. No one admitted to the privilege of hearing you can
LINE 119: think anything wanting. We neither of us perform to strangers."
LINE 120: Here they were interrupted by Lady Catherine, who called out to know
LINE 121: what they were talking of. Elizabeth immediately began playing again.
LINE 122: Lady Catherine approached, and, after listening for a few minutes, said
LINE 123: to Darcy,--
LINE 124: "Miss Bennet would not play at all amiss if she practised more, and
LINE 125: could have the advantage of a London master. She has a very good notion
LINE 126: of fingering, though her taste is not equal to Anne's. Anne would have
LINE 127: been a delightful performer, had her health allowed her to learn."
LINE 128: Elizabeth looked at Darcy, to see how cordially he assented to his
LINE 129: cousin's praise: but neither at that moment nor at any other could she
LINE 130: discern any symptom of love; and from the whole of his behaviour to Miss
LINE 131: De Bourgh she derived this comfort for Miss Bingley, that he might have
LINE 132: been just as likely to marry _her_, had she been his relation.
LINE 133: Lady Catherine continued her remarks on Elizabeth's performance, mixing
LINE 134: with them many instructions on execution and taste. Elizabeth received
LINE 135: them with all the forbearance of civility; and at the request of the
LINE 136: gentlemen remained at the instrument till her Ladyship's carriage was
LINE 137: ready to take them all home.
LINE 138: [Illustration]