LINE 1: [Illustration]
LINE 2: Elizabeth passed the chief of the night in her sister's room, and in the
LINE 3: morning had the pleasure of being able to send a tolerable answer to the
LINE 4: inquiries which she very early received from Mr. Bingley by a housemaid,
LINE 5: and some time afterwards from the two elegant ladies who waited on his
LINE 6: sisters. In spite of this amendment, however, she requested to have a
LINE 7: note sent to Longbourn, desiring her mother to visit Jane, and form her
LINE 8: own judgment of her situation. The note was immediately despatched, and
LINE 9: its contents as quickly complied with. Mrs. Bennet, accompanied by her
LINE 10: two youngest girls, reached Netherfield soon after the family breakfast.
LINE 11: Had she found Jane in any apparent danger, Mrs. Bennet would have been
LINE 12: very miserable; but being satisfied on seeing her that her illness was
LINE 13: not alarming, she had no wish of her recovering immediately, as her
LINE 14: restoration to health would probably remove her from Netherfield. She
LINE 15: would not listen, therefore, to her daughter's proposal of being carried
LINE 16: home; neither did the apothecary, who arrived about the same time, think
LINE 17: it at all advisable. After sitting a little while with Jane, on Miss
LINE 18: Bingley's appearance and invitation, the mother and three daughters all
LINE 19: attended her into the breakfast parlour. Bingley met them with hopes
LINE 20: that Mrs. Bennet had not found Miss Bennet worse than she expected.
LINE 21: "Indeed I have, sir," was her answer. "She is a great deal too ill to be
LINE 22: moved. Mr. Jones says we must not think of moving her. We must trespass
LINE 23: a little longer on your kindness."
LINE 24: "Removed!" cried Bingley. "It must not be thought of. My sister, I am
LINE 25: sure, will not hear of her removal."
LINE 26: "You may depend upon it, madam," said Miss Bingley, with cold civility,
LINE 27: "that Miss Bennet shall receive every possible attention while she
LINE 28: remains with us."
LINE 29: Mrs. Bennet was profuse in her acknowledgments.
LINE 30: "I am sure," she added, "if it was not for such good friends, I do not
LINE 31: know what would become of her, for she is very ill indeed, and suffers a
LINE 32: vast deal, though with the greatest patience in the world, which is
LINE 33: always the way with her, for she has, without exception, the sweetest
LINE 34: temper I ever met with. I often tell my other girls they are nothing to
LINE 35: _her_. You have a sweet room here, Mr. Bingley, and a charming prospect
LINE 36: over that gravel walk. I do not know a place in the country that is
LINE 37: equal to Netherfield. You will not think of quitting it in a hurry, I
LINE 38: hope, though you have but a short lease."
LINE 39: "Whatever I do is done in a hurry," replied he; "and therefore if I
LINE 40: should resolve to quit Netherfield, I should probably be off in five
LINE 41: minutes. At present, however, I consider myself as quite fixed here."
LINE 42: "That is exactly what I should have supposed of you," said Elizabeth.
LINE 43: "You begin to comprehend me, do you?" cried he, turning towards her.
LINE 44: "Oh yes--I understand you perfectly."
LINE 45: "I wish I might take this for a compliment; but to be so easily seen
LINE 46: through, I am afraid, is pitiful."
LINE 47: "That is as it happens. It does not necessarily follow that a deep,
LINE 48: intricate character is more or less estimable than such a one as yours."
LINE 49: "Lizzy," cried her mother, "remember where you are, and do not run on in
LINE 50: the wild manner that you are suffered to do at home."
LINE 51: "I did not know before," continued Bingley, immediately, "that you were
LINE 52: a studier of character. It must be an amusing study."
LINE 53: "Yes; but intricate characters are the _most_ amusing. They have at
LINE 54: least that advantage."
LINE 55: "The country," said Darcy, "can in general supply but few subjects for
LINE 56: such a study. In a country neighbourhood you move in a very confined and
LINE 57: unvarying society."
LINE 58: "But people themselves alter so much, that there is something new to be
LINE 59: observed in them for ever."
LINE 60: "Yes, indeed," cried Mrs. Bennet, offended by his manner of mentioning a
LINE 61: country neighbourhood. "I assure you there is quite as much of _that_
LINE 62: going on in the country as in town."
LINE 63: Everybody was surprised; and Darcy, after looking at her for a moment,
LINE 64: turned silently away. Mrs. Bennet, who fancied she had gained a complete
LINE 65: victory over him, continued her triumph,--
LINE 66: "I cannot see that London has any great advantage over the country, for
LINE 67: my part, except the shops and public places. The country is a vast deal
LINE 68: pleasanter, is not it, Mr. Bingley?"
LINE 69: "When I am in the country," he replied, "I never wish to leave it; and
LINE 70: when I am in town, it is pretty much the same. They have each their
LINE 71: advantages, and I can be equally happy in either."
LINE 72: "Ay, that is because you have the right disposition. But that
LINE 73: gentleman," looking at Darcy, "seemed to think the country was nothing
LINE 74: at all."
LINE 75: "Indeed, mamma, you are mistaken," said Elizabeth, blushing for her
LINE 76: mother. "You quite mistook Mr. Darcy. He only meant that there was not
LINE 77: such a variety of people to be met with in the country as in town, which
LINE 78: you must acknowledge to be true."
LINE 79: "Certainly, my dear, nobody said there were; but as to not meeting with
LINE 80: many people in this neighbourhood, I believe there are few
LINE 81: neighbourhoods larger. I know we dine with four-and-twenty families."
LINE 82: Nothing but concern for Elizabeth could enable Bingley to keep his
LINE 83: countenance. His sister was less delicate, and directed her eye towards
LINE 84: Mr. Darcy with a very expressive smile. Elizabeth, for the sake of
LINE 85: saying something that might turn her mother's thoughts, now asked her if
LINE 86: Charlotte Lucas had been at Longbourn since _her_ coming away.
LINE 87: "Yes, she called yesterday with her father. What an agreeable man Sir
LINE 88: William is, Mr. Bingley--is not he? so much the man of fashion! so
LINE 89: genteel and so easy! He has always something to say to everybody. _That_
LINE 90: is my idea of good breeding; and those persons who fancy themselves very
LINE 91: important and never open their mouths quite mistake the matter."
LINE 92: "Did Charlotte dine with you?"
LINE 93: "No, she would go home. I fancy she was wanted about the mince-pies. For
LINE 94: my part, Mr. Bingley, _I_ always keep servants that can do their own
LINE 95: work; _my_ daughters are brought up differently. But everybody is to
LINE 96: judge for themselves, and the Lucases are a very good sort of girls, I
LINE 97: assure you. It is a pity they are not handsome! Not that _I_ think
LINE 98: Charlotte so _very_ plain; but then she is our particular friend."
LINE 99: "She seems a very pleasant young woman," said Bingley.
LINE 100: "Oh dear, yes; but you must own she is very plain. Lady Lucas herself
LINE 101: has often said so, and envied me Jane's beauty. I do not like to boast
LINE 102: of my own child; but to be sure, Jane--one does not often see anybody
LINE 103: better looking. It is what everybody says. I do not trust my own
LINE 104: partiality. When she was only fifteen there was a gentleman at my
LINE 105: brother Gardiner's in town so much in love with her, that my
LINE 106: sister-in-law was sure he would make her an offer before we came away.
LINE 107: But, however, he did not. Perhaps he thought her too young. However, he
LINE 108: wrote some verses on her, and very pretty they were."
LINE 109: "And so ended his affection," said Elizabeth, impatiently. "There has
LINE 110: been many a one, I fancy, overcome in the same way. I wonder who first
LINE 111: discovered the efficacy of poetry in driving away love!"
LINE 112: "I have been used to consider poetry as the _food_ of love," said Darcy.
LINE 113: "Of a fine, stout, healthy love it may. Everything nourishes what is
LINE 114: strong already. But if it be only a slight, thin sort of inclination, I
LINE 115: am convinced that one good sonnet will starve it entirely away."
LINE 116: Darcy only smiled; and the general pause which ensued made Elizabeth
LINE 117: tremble lest her mother should be exposing herself again. She longed to
LINE 118: speak, but could think of nothing to say; and after a short silence Mrs.
LINE 119: Bennet began repeating her thanks to Mr. Bingley for his kindness to
LINE 120: Jane, with an apology for troubling him also with Lizzy. Mr. Bingley was
LINE 121: unaffectedly civil in his answer, and forced his younger sister to be
LINE 122: civil also, and say what the occasion required. She performed her part,
LINE 123: indeed, without much graciousness, but Mrs. Bennet was satisfied, and
LINE 124: soon afterwards ordered her carriage. Upon this signal, the youngest of
LINE 125: her daughters put herself forward. The two girls had been whispering to
LINE 126: each other during the whole visit; and the result of it was, that the
LINE 127: youngest should tax Mr. Bingley with having promised on his first coming
LINE 128: into the country to give a ball at Netherfield.
LINE 129: Lydia was a stout, well-grown girl of fifteen, with a fine complexion
LINE 130: and good-humoured countenance; a favourite with her mother, whose
LINE 131: affection had brought her into public at an early age. She had high
LINE 132: animal spirits, and a sort of natural self-consequence, which the
LINE 133: attentions of the officers, to whom her uncle's good dinners and her
LINE 134: own easy manners recommended her, had increased into assurance. She was
LINE 135: very equal, therefore, to address Mr. Bingley on the subject of the
LINE 136: ball, and abruptly reminded him of his promise; adding, that it would be
LINE 137: the most shameful thing in the world if he did not keep it. His answer
LINE 138: to this sudden attack was delightful to her mother's ear.
LINE 139: "I am perfectly ready, I assure you, to keep my engagement; and, when
LINE 140: your sister is recovered, you shall, if you please, name the very day of
LINE 141: the ball. But you would not wish to be dancing while she is ill?"
LINE 142: Lydia declared herself satisfied. "Oh yes--it would be much better to
LINE 143: wait till Jane was well; and by that time, most likely, Captain Carter
LINE 144: would be at Meryton again. And when you have given _your_ ball," she
LINE 145: added, "I shall insist on their giving one also. I shall tell Colonel
LINE 146: Forster it will be quite a shame if he does not."
LINE 147: Mrs. Bennet and her daughters then departed, and Elizabeth returned
LINE 148: instantly to Jane, leaving her own and her relations' behaviour to the
LINE 149: remarks of the two ladies and Mr. Darcy; the latter of whom, however,
LINE 150: could not be prevailed on to join in their censure of _her_, in spite of
LINE 151: all Miss Bingley's witticisms on _fine eyes_.
LINE 152: [Illustration]