LINE 1: [Illustration]
LINE 2: Elizabeth related to Jane, the next day, what had passed between Mr.
LINE 3: Wickham and herself. Jane listened with astonishment and concern: she
LINE 4: knew not how to believe that Mr. Darcy could be so unworthy of Mr.
LINE 5: Bingley's regard; and yet it was not in her nature to question the
LINE 6: veracity of a young man of such amiable appearance as Wickham. The
LINE 7: possibility of his having really endured such unkindness was enough to
LINE 8: interest all her tender feelings; and nothing therefore remained to be
LINE 9: done but to think well of them both, to defend the conduct of each, and
LINE 10: throw into the account of accident or mistake whatever could not be
LINE 11: otherwise explained.
LINE 12: "They have both," said she, "been deceived, I dare say, in some way or
LINE 13: other, of which we can form no idea. Interested people have perhaps
LINE 14: misrepresented each to the other. It is, in short, impossible for us to
LINE 15: conjecture the causes or circumstances which may have alienated them,
LINE 16: without actual blame on either side."
LINE 17: "Very true, indeed; and now, my dear Jane, what have you got to say in
LINE 18: behalf of the interested people who have probably been concerned in the
LINE 19: business? Do clear _them_, too, or we shall be obliged to think ill of
LINE 20: somebody."
LINE 21: "Laugh as much as you choose, but you will not laugh me out of my
LINE 22: opinion. My dearest Lizzy, do but consider in what a disgraceful light
LINE 23: it places Mr. Darcy, to be treating his father's favourite in such a
LINE 24: manner,--one whom his father had promised to provide for. It is
LINE 25: impossible. No man of common humanity, no man who had any value for his
LINE 26: character, could be capable of it. Can his most intimate friends be so
LINE 27: excessively deceived in him? Oh no."
LINE 28: "I can much more easily believe Mr. Bingley's being imposed on than that
LINE 29: Mr. Wickham should invent such a history of himself as he gave me last
LINE 30: night; names, facts, everything mentioned without ceremony. If it be not
LINE 31: so, let Mr. Darcy contradict it. Besides, there was truth in his looks."
LINE 32: "It is difficult, indeed--it is distressing. One does not know what to
LINE 33: think."
LINE 34: "I beg your pardon;--one knows exactly what to think."
LINE 35: But Jane could think with certainty on only one point,--that Mr.
LINE 36: Bingley, if he _had been_ imposed on, would have much to suffer when
LINE 37: the affair became public.
LINE 38: The two young ladies were summoned from the shrubbery, where this
LINE 39: conversation passed, by the arrival of some of the very persons of whom
LINE 40: they had been speaking; Mr. Bingley and his sisters came to give their
LINE 41: personal invitation for the long expected ball at Netherfield, which was
LINE 42: fixed for the following Tuesday. The two ladies were delighted to see
LINE 43: their dear friend again, called it an age since they had met, and
LINE 44: repeatedly asked what she had been doing with herself since their
LINE 45: separation. To the rest of the family they paid little attention;
LINE 46: avoiding Mrs. Bennet as much as possible, saying not much to Elizabeth,
LINE 47: and nothing at all to the others. They were soon gone again, rising from
LINE 48: their seats with an activity which took their brother by surprise, and
LINE 49: hurrying off as if eager to escape from Mrs. Bennet's civilities.
LINE 50: The prospect of the Netherfield ball was extremely agreeable to every
LINE 51: female of the family. Mrs. Bennet chose to consider it as given in
LINE 52: compliment to her eldest daughter, and was particularly flattered by
LINE 53: receiving the invitation from Mr. Bingley himself, instead of a
LINE 54: ceremonious card. Jane pictured to herself a happy evening in the
LINE 55: society of her two friends, and the attentions of their brother; and
LINE 56: Elizabeth thought with pleasure of dancing a great deal with Mr.
LINE 57: Wickham, and of seeing a confirmation of everything in Mr. Darcy's look
LINE 58: and behaviour. The happiness anticipated by Catherine and Lydia depended
LINE 59: less on any single event, or any particular person; for though they
LINE 60: each, like Elizabeth, meant to dance half the evening with Mr. Wickham,
LINE 61: he was by no means the only partner who could satisfy them, and a ball
LINE 62: was, at any rate, a ball. And even Mary could assure her family that she
LINE 63: had no disinclination for it.
LINE 64: "While I can have my mornings to myself," said she, "it is enough. I
LINE 65: think it is no sacrifice to join occasionally in evening engagements.
LINE 66: Society has claims on us all; and I profess myself one of those who
LINE 67: consider intervals of recreation and amusement as desirable for
LINE 68: everybody."
LINE 69: Elizabeth's spirits were so high on the occasion, that though she did
LINE 70: not often speak unnecessarily to Mr. Collins, she could not help asking
LINE 71: him whether he intended to accept Mr. Bingley's invitation, and if he
LINE 72: did, whether he would think it proper to join in the evening's
LINE 73: amusement; and she was rather surprised to find that he entertained no
LINE 74: scruple whatever on that head, and was very far from dreading a rebuke,
LINE 75: either from the Archbishop or Lady Catherine de Bourgh, by venturing to
LINE 76: dance.
LINE 77: "I am by no means of opinion, I assure you," said he, "that a ball of
LINE 78: this kind, given by a young man of character, to respectable people, can
LINE 79: have any evil tendency; and I am so far from objecting to dancing
LINE 80: myself, that I shall hope to be honoured with the hands of all my fair
LINE 81: cousins in the course of the evening; and I take this opportunity of
LINE 82: soliciting yours, Miss Elizabeth, for the two first dances especially; a
LINE 83: preference which I trust my cousin Jane will attribute to the right
LINE 84: cause, and not to any disrespect for her."
LINE 85: Elizabeth felt herself completely taken in. She had fully proposed being
LINE 86: engaged by Wickham for those very dances; and to have Mr. Collins
LINE 87: instead!--her liveliness had been never worse timed. There was no help
LINE 88: for it, however. Mr. Wickham's happiness and her own was perforce
LINE 89: delayed a little longer, and Mr. Collins's proposal accepted with as
LINE 90: good a grace as she could. She was not the better pleased with his
LINE 91: gallantry, from the idea it suggested of something more. It now first
LINE 92: struck her, that _she_ was selected from among her sisters as worthy of
LINE 93: being the mistress of Hunsford Parsonage, and of assisting to form a
LINE 94: quadrille table at Rosings, in the absence of more eligible visitors.
LINE 95: The idea soon reached to conviction, as she observed his increasing
LINE 96: civilities towards herself, and heard his frequent attempt at a
LINE 97: compliment on her wit and vivacity; and though more astonished than
LINE 98: gratified herself by this effect of her charms, it was not long before
LINE 99: her mother gave her to understand that the probability of their marriage
LINE 100: was exceedingly agreeable to _her_. Elizabeth, however, did not choose
LINE 101: to take the hint, being well aware that a serious dispute must be the
LINE 102: consequence of any reply. Mr. Collins might never make the offer, and,
LINE 103: till he did, it was useless to quarrel about him.
LINE 104: If there had not been a Netherfield ball to prepare for and talk of, the
LINE 105: younger Miss Bennets would have been in a pitiable state at this time;
LINE 106: for, from the day of the invitation to the day of the ball, there was
LINE 107: such a succession of rain as prevented their walking to Meryton once. No
LINE 108: aunt, no officers, no news could be sought after; the very shoe-roses
LINE 109: for Netherfield were got by proxy. Even Elizabeth might have found some
LINE 110: trial of her patience in weather which totally suspended the improvement
LINE 111: of her acquaintance with Mr. Wickham; and nothing less than a dance on
LINE 112: Tuesday could have made such a Friday, Saturday, Sunday, and Monday
LINE 113: endurable to Kitty and Lydia.
LINE 114: [Illustration]