LINE 1: [Illustration]
LINE 2: During dinner, Mr. Bennet scarcely spoke at all; but when the servants
LINE 3: were withdrawn, he thought it time to have some conversation with his
LINE 4: guest, and therefore started a subject in which he expected him to
LINE 5: shine, by observing that he seemed very fortunate in his patroness. Lady
LINE 6: Catherine de Bourgh's attention to his wishes, and consideration for his
LINE 7: comfort, appeared very remarkable. Mr. Bennet could not have chosen
LINE 8: better. Mr. Collins was eloquent in her praise. The subject elevated him
LINE 9: to more than usual solemnity of manner; and with a most important aspect
LINE 10: he protested that he had never in his life witnessed such behaviour in a
LINE 11: person of rank--such affability and condescension, as he had himself
LINE 12: experienced from Lady Catherine. She had been graciously pleased to
LINE 13: approve of both the discourses which he had already had the honour of
LINE 14: preaching before her. She had also asked him twice to dine at Rosings,
LINE 15: and had sent for him only the Saturday before, to make up her pool of
LINE 16: quadrille in the evening. Lady Catherine was reckoned proud by many
LINE 17: people, he knew, but _he_ had never seen anything but affability in her.
LINE 18: She had always spoken to him as she would to any other gentleman; she
LINE 19: made not the smallest objection to his joining in the society of the
LINE 20: neighbourhood, nor to his leaving his parish occasionally for a week or
LINE 21: two to visit his relations. She had even condescended to advise him to
LINE 22: marry as soon as he could, provided he chose with discretion; and had
LINE 23: once paid him a visit in his humble parsonage, where she had perfectly
LINE 24: approved all the alterations he had been making, and had even vouchsafed
LINE 25: to suggest some herself,--some shelves in the closets upstairs.
LINE 26: "That is all very proper and civil, I am sure," said Mrs. Bennet, "and I
LINE 27: dare say she is a very agreeable woman. It is a pity that great ladies
LINE 28: in general are not more like her. Does she live near you, sir?"
LINE 29: "The garden in which stands my humble abode is separated only by a lane
LINE 30: from Rosings Park, her Ladyship's residence."
LINE 31: "I think you said she was a widow, sir? has she any family?"
LINE 32: "She has one only daughter, the heiress of Rosings, and of very
LINE 33: extensive property."
LINE 34: "Ah," cried Mrs. Bennet, shaking her head, "then she is better off than
LINE 35: many girls. And what sort of young lady is she? Is she handsome?"
LINE 36: "She is a most charming young lady, indeed. Lady Catherine herself says
LINE 37: that, in point of true beauty, Miss de Bourgh is far superior to the
LINE 38: handsomest of her sex; because there is that in her features which marks
LINE 39: the young woman of distinguished birth. She is unfortunately of a sickly
LINE 40: constitution, which has prevented her making that progress in many
LINE 41: accomplishments which she could not otherwise have failed of, as I am
LINE 42: informed by the lady who superintended her education, and who still
LINE 43: resides with them. But she is perfectly amiable, and often condescends
LINE 44: to drive by my humble abode in her little phaeton and ponies."
LINE 45: "Has she been presented? I do not remember her name among the ladies at
LINE 46: court."
LINE 47: "Her indifferent state of health unhappily prevents her being in town;
LINE 48: and by that means, as I told Lady Catherine myself one day, has deprived
LINE 49: the British Court of its brightest ornament. Her Ladyship seemed pleased
LINE 50: with the idea; and you may imagine that I am happy on every occasion to
LINE 51: offer those little delicate compliments which are always acceptable to
LINE 52: ladies. I have more than once observed to Lady Catherine, that her
LINE 53: charming daughter seemed born to be a duchess; and that the most
LINE 54: elevated rank, instead of giving her consequence, would be adorned by
LINE 55: her. These are the kind of little things which please her Ladyship, and
LINE 56: it is a sort of attention which I conceive myself peculiarly bound to
LINE 57: pay."
LINE 58: "You judge very properly," said Mr. Bennet; "and it is happy for you
LINE 59: that you possess the talent of flattering with delicacy. May I ask
LINE 60: whether these pleasing attentions proceed from the impulse of the
LINE 61: moment, or are the result of previous study?"
LINE 62: "They arise chiefly from what is passing at the time; and though I
LINE 63: sometimes amuse myself with suggesting and arranging such little elegant
LINE 64: compliments as may be adapted to ordinary occasions, I always wish to
LINE 65: give them as unstudied an air as possible."
LINE 66: Mr. Bennet's expectations were fully answered. His cousin was as absurd
LINE 67: as he had hoped; and he listened to him with the keenest enjoyment,
LINE 68: maintaining at the same time the most resolute composure of countenance,
LINE 69: and, except in an occasional glance at Elizabeth, requiring no partner
LINE 70: in his pleasure.
LINE 71: By tea-time, however, the dose had been enough, and Mr. Bennet was glad
LINE 72: to take his guest into the drawing-room again, and when tea was over,
LINE 73: glad to invite him
LINE 74: [Illustration:
LINE 75: "Protested
LINE 76: that he never read novels" H.T Feb 94
LINE 77: ]
LINE 78: to read aloud to the ladies. Mr. Collins readily assented, and a book
LINE 79: was produced; but on beholding it (for everything announced it to be
LINE 80: from a circulating library) he started back, and, begging pardon,
LINE 81: protested that he never read novels. Kitty stared at him, and Lydia
LINE 82: exclaimed. Other books were produced, and after some deliberation he
LINE 83: chose "Fordyce's Sermons." Lydia gaped as he opened the volume; and
LINE 84: before he had, with very monotonous solemnity, read three pages, she
LINE 85: interrupted him with,--
LINE 86: "Do you know, mamma, that my uncle Philips talks of turning away
LINE 87: Richard? and if he does, Colonel Forster will hire him. My aunt told me
LINE 88: so herself on Saturday. I shall walk to Meryton to-morrow to hear more
LINE 89: about it, and to ask when Mr. Denny comes back from town."
LINE 90: Lydia was bid by her two eldest sisters to hold her tongue; but Mr.
LINE 91: Collins, much offended, laid aside his book, and said,--
LINE 92: "I have often observed how little young ladies are interested by books
LINE 93: of a serious stamp, though written solely for their benefit. It amazes
LINE 94: me, I confess; for certainly there can be nothing so advantageous to
LINE 95: them as instruction. But I will no longer importune my young cousin."
LINE 96: Then, turning to Mr. Bennet, he offered himself as his antagonist at
LINE 97: backgammon. Mr. Bennet accepted the challenge, observing that he acted
LINE 98: very wisely in leaving the girls to their own trifling amusements. Mrs.
LINE 99: Bennet and her daughters apologized most civilly for Lydia's
LINE 100: interruption, and promised that it should not occur again, if he would
LINE 101: resume his book; but Mr. Collins, after assuring them that he bore his
LINE 102: young cousin no ill-will, and should never resent her behaviour as any
LINE 103: affront, seated himself at another table with Mr. Bennet, and prepared
LINE 104: for backgammon.
LINE 105: [Illustration]