LINE 1: [Illustration]
LINE 2: The next day opened a new scene at Longbourn. Mr. Collins made his
LINE 3: declaration in form. Having resolved to do it without loss of time, as
LINE 4: his leave of absence extended only to the following Saturday, and having
LINE 5: no feelings of diffidence to make it distressing to himself even at the
LINE 6: moment, he set about it in a very orderly manner, with all the
LINE 7: observances which he supposed a regular part of the business. On finding
LINE 8: Mrs. Bennet, Elizabeth, and one of the younger girls together, soon
LINE 9: after breakfast, he addressed the mother in these words,--
LINE 10: "May I hope, madam, for your interest with your fair daughter Elizabeth,
LINE 11: when I solicit for the honour of a private audience with her in the
LINE 12: course of this morning?"
LINE 13: Before Elizabeth had time for anything but a blush of surprise, Mrs.
LINE 14: Bennet instantly answered,--
LINE 15: "Oh dear! Yes, certainly. I am sure Lizzy will be very happy--I am sure
LINE 16: she can have no objection. Come, Kitty, I want you upstairs." And
LINE 17: gathering her work together, she was hastening away, when Elizabeth
LINE 18: called out,--
LINE 19: "Dear ma'am, do not go. I beg you will not go. Mr. Collins must excuse
LINE 20: me. He can have nothing to say to me that anybody need not hear. I am
LINE 21: going away myself."
LINE 22: "No, no, nonsense, Lizzy. I desire you will stay where you are." And
LINE 23: upon Elizabeth's seeming really, with vexed and embarrassed looks, about
LINE 24: to escape, she added, "Lizzy, I _insist_ upon your staying and hearing
LINE 25: Mr. Collins."
LINE 26: Elizabeth would not oppose such an injunction; and a moment's
LINE 27: consideration making her also sensible that it would be wisest to get it
LINE 28: over as soon and as quietly as possible, she sat down again, and tried
LINE 29: to conceal, by incessant employment, the feelings which were divided
LINE 30: between distress and diversion. Mrs. Bennet and Kitty walked off, and as
LINE 31: soon as they were gone, Mr. Collins began,--
LINE 32: "Believe me, my dear Miss Elizabeth, that your modesty, so far from
LINE 33: doing you any disservice, rather adds to your other perfections. You
LINE 34: would have been less amiable in my eyes had there _not_ been this little
LINE 35: unwillingness; but allow me to assure you that I have your respected
LINE 36: mother's permission for this address. You can hardly doubt the purport
LINE 37: of my discourse, however your natural delicacy may lead you to
LINE 38: dissemble; my attentions have been too marked to be mistaken. Almost as
LINE 39: soon as I entered the house I singled you out as the companion of my
LINE 40: future life. But before I am run away with by my feelings on this
LINE 41: subject, perhaps it will be advisable for me to state my reasons for
LINE 42: marrying--and, moreover, for coming into Hertfordshire with the design
LINE 43: of selecting a wife, as I certainly did."
LINE 44: The idea of Mr. Collins, with all his solemn composure, being run away
LINE 45: with by his feelings, made Elizabeth so near laughing that she could not
LINE 46: use the short pause he allowed in any attempt to stop him farther, and
LINE 47: he continued,--
LINE 48: "My reasons for marrying are, first, that I think it a right thing for
LINE 49: every clergyman in easy circumstances (like myself) to set the example
LINE 50: of matrimony in his parish; secondly, that I am convinced it will add
LINE 51: very greatly to my happiness; and, thirdly, which perhaps I ought to
LINE 52: have mentioned earlier, that it is the particular advice and
LINE 53: recommendation of the very noble lady whom I have the honour of calling
LINE 54: patroness. Twice has she condescended to give me her opinion (unasked
LINE 55: too!) on this subject; and it was but the very Saturday night before I
LINE 56: left Hunsford,--between our pools at quadrille, while Mrs. Jenkinson was
LINE 57: arranging Miss De Bourgh's footstool,--that she said, 'Mr. Collins, you
LINE 58: must marry. A clergyman like you must marry. Choose properly, choose a
LINE 59: gentlewoman for _my_ sake, and for your _own_; let her be an active,
LINE 60: useful sort of person, not brought up high, but able to make a small
LINE 61: income go a good way. This is my advice. Find such a woman as soon as
LINE 62: you can, bring her to Hunsford, and I will visit her.' Allow me, by the
LINE 63: way, to observe, my fair cousin, that I do not reckon the notice and
LINE 64: kindness of Lady Catherine de Bourgh as among the least of the
LINE 65: advantages in my power to offer. You will find her manners beyond
LINE 66: anything I can describe; and your wit and vivacity, I think, must be
LINE 67: acceptable to her, especially when tempered with the silence and respect
LINE 68: which her rank will inevitably excite. Thus much for my general
LINE 69: intention in favour of matrimony; it remains to be told why my views
LINE 70: were directed to Longbourn instead of my own neighbourhood, where I
LINE 71: assure you there are many amiable young women. But the fact is, that
LINE 72: being, as I am, to inherit this estate after the death of your honoured
LINE 73: father (who, however, may live many years longer), I could not satisfy
LINE 74: myself without resolving to choose a wife from among his daughters, that
LINE 75: the loss to them might be as little as possible when the melancholy
LINE 76: event takes place--which, however, as I have already said, may not be
LINE 77: for several years. This has been my motive, my fair cousin, and I
LINE 78: flatter myself it will not sink me in your esteem. And now nothing
LINE 79: remains for me but to assure you in the most animated language of the
LINE 80: violence of my affection. To fortune I am perfectly indifferent, and
LINE 81: shall make no demand of that nature on your father, since I am well
LINE 82: aware that it could not be complied with; and that one thousand pounds
LINE 83: in the 4 per cents., which will not be yours till after your mother's
LINE 84: decease, is all that you may ever be entitled to. On that head,
LINE 85: therefore, I shall be uniformly silent: and you may assure yourself that
LINE 86: no ungenerous reproach shall ever pass my lips when we are married."
LINE 87: It was absolutely necessary to interrupt him now.
LINE 88: "You are too hasty, sir," she cried. "You forget that I have made no
LINE 89: answer. Let me do it without further loss of time. Accept my thanks for
LINE 90: the compliment you are paying me. I am very sensible of the honour of
LINE 91: your proposals, but it is impossible for me to do otherwise than decline
LINE 92: them."
LINE 93: "I am not now to learn," replied Mr. Collins, with a formal wave of the
LINE 94: hand, "that it is usual with young ladies to reject the addresses of the
LINE 95: man whom they secretly mean to accept, when he first applies for their
LINE 96: favour; and that sometimes the refusal is repeated a second or even a
LINE 97: third time. I am, therefore, by no means discouraged by what you have
LINE 98: just said, and shall hope to lead you to the altar ere long."
LINE 99: "Upon my word, sir," cried Elizabeth, "your hope is rather an
LINE 100: extraordinary one after my declaration. I do assure you that I am not
LINE 101: one of those young ladies (if such young ladies there are) who are so
LINE 102: daring as to risk their happiness on the chance of being asked a second
LINE 103: time. I am perfectly serious in my refusal. You could not make _me_
LINE 104: happy, and I am convinced that I am the last woman in the world who
LINE 105: would make _you_ so. Nay, were your friend Lady Catherine to know me, I
LINE 106: am persuaded she would find me in every respect ill qualified for the
LINE 107: situation."
LINE 108: "Were it certain that Lady Catherine would think so," said Mr. Collins,
LINE 109: very gravely--"but I cannot imagine that her Ladyship would at all
LINE 110: disapprove of you. And you may be certain that when I have the honour of
LINE 111: seeing her again I shall speak in the highest terms of your modesty,
LINE 112: economy, and other amiable qualifications."
LINE 113: "Indeed, Mr. Collins, all praise of me will be unnecessary. You must
LINE 114: give me leave to judge for myself, and pay me the compliment of
LINE 115: believing what I say. I wish you very happy and very rich, and by
LINE 116: refusing your hand, do all in my power to prevent your being otherwise.
LINE 117: In making me the offer, you must have satisfied the delicacy of your
LINE 118: feelings with regard to my family, and may take possession of Longbourn
LINE 119: estate whenever it falls, without any self-reproach. This matter may be
LINE 120: considered, therefore, as finally settled." And rising as she thus
LINE 121: spoke, she would have quitted the room, had not Mr. Collins thus
LINE 122: addressed her,--
LINE 123: "When I do myself the honour of speaking to you next on the subject, I
LINE 124: shall hope to receive a more favourable answer than you have now given
LINE 125: me; though I am far from accusing you of cruelty at present, because I
LINE 126: know it to be the established custom of your sex to reject a man on the
LINE 127: first application, and, perhaps, you have even now said as much to
LINE 128: encourage my suit as would be consistent with the true delicacy of the
LINE 129: female character."
LINE 130: "Really, Mr. Collins," cried Elizabeth, with some warmth, "you puzzle me
LINE 131: exceedingly. If what I have hitherto said can appear to you in the form
LINE 132: of encouragement, I know not how to express my refusal in such a way as
LINE 133: may convince you of its being one."
LINE 134: "You must give me leave to flatter myself, my dear cousin, that your
LINE 135: refusal of my addresses are merely words of course. My reasons for
LINE 136: believing it are briefly these:--It does not appear to me that my hand
LINE 137: is unworthy of your acceptance, or that the establishment I can offer
LINE 138: would be any other than highly desirable. My situation in life, my
LINE 139: connections with the family of De Bourgh, and my relationship to your
LINE 140: own, are circumstances highly in my favour; and you should take it into
LINE 141: further consideration that, in spite of your manifold attractions, it is
LINE 142: by no means certain that another offer of marriage may ever be made you.
LINE 143: Your portion is unhappily so small, that it will in all likelihood undo
LINE 144: the effects of your loveliness and amiable qualifications. As I must,
LINE 145: therefore, conclude that you are not serious in your rejection of me, I
LINE 146: shall choose to attribute it to your wish of increasing my love by
LINE 147: suspense, according to the usual practice of elegant females."
LINE 148: "I do assure you, sir, that I have no pretensions whatever to that kind
LINE 149: of elegance which consists in tormenting a respectable man. I would
LINE 150: rather be paid the compliment of being believed sincere. I thank you
LINE 151: again and again for the honour you have done me in your proposals, but
LINE 152: to accept them is absolutely impossible. My feelings in every respect
LINE 153: forbid it. Can I speak plainer? Do not consider me now as an elegant
LINE 154: female intending to plague you, but as a rational creature speaking the
LINE 155: truth from her heart."
LINE 156: "You are uniformly charming!" cried he, with an air of awkward
LINE 157: gallantry; "and I am persuaded that, when sanctioned by the express
LINE 158: authority of both your excellent parents, my proposals will not fail of
LINE 159: being acceptable."
LINE 160: To such perseverance in wilful self-deception Elizabeth would make no
LINE 161: reply, and immediately and in silence withdrew; determined, that if he
LINE 162: persisted in considering her repeated refusals as flattering
LINE 163: encouragement, to apply to her father, whose negative might be uttered
LINE 164: in such a manner as must be decisive, and whose behaviour at least could
LINE 165: not be mistaken for the affectation and coquetry of an elegant female.
LINE 166: [Illustration]