LINE 1: [Illustration]
LINE 2: The two gentlemen left Rosings the next morning; and Mr. Collins having
LINE 3: been in waiting near the lodges, to make them his parting obeisance, was
LINE 4: able to bring home the pleasing intelligence of their appearing in very
LINE 5: good health, and in as tolerable spirits as could be expected, after the
LINE 6: melancholy scene so lately gone through at Rosings. To Rosings he then
LINE 7: hastened to console Lady Catherine and her daughter; and on his return
LINE 8: brought back, with great satisfaction, a message from her Ladyship,
LINE 9: importing that she felt herself so dull as to make her very desirous of
LINE 10: having them all to dine with her.
LINE 11: Elizabeth could not see Lady Catherine without recollecting that, had
LINE 12: she chosen it, she might by this time have been presented to her as her
LINE 13: future niece; nor could she think, without a smile, of what her
LINE 14: Ladyship's indignation would have been. "What would she have said? how
LINE 15: would she have behaved?" were the questions with which she amused
LINE 16: herself.
LINE 17: Their first subject was the diminution of the Rosings' party. "I assure
LINE 18: you, I feel it exceedingly," said Lady Catherine; "I believe nobody
LINE 19: feels the loss of friends so much as I do. But I am particularly
LINE 20: attached to these young men; and know them to be so much attached to me!
LINE 21: They were excessively sorry to go! But so they always are. The dear
LINE 22: Colonel rallied his spirits tolerably till just at last; but Darcy
LINE 23: seemed to feel it most acutely--more, I think, than last year. His
LINE 24: attachment to Rosings certainly increases."
LINE 25: Mr. Collins had a compliment and an allusion to throw in here, which
LINE 26: were kindly smiled on by the mother and daughter.
LINE 27: Lady Catherine observed, after dinner, that Miss Bennet seemed out of
LINE 28: spirits; and immediately accounting for it herself, by supposing that
LINE 29: she did not like to go home again so soon, she added,--
LINE 30: "But if that is the case, you must write to your mother to beg that you
LINE 31: may stay a little longer. Mrs. Collins will be very glad of your
LINE 32: company, I am sure."
LINE 33: "I am much obliged to your Ladyship for your kind invitation," replied
LINE 34: Elizabeth; "but it is not in my power to accept it. I must be in town
LINE 35: next Saturday."
LINE 36: "Why, at that rate, you will have been here only six weeks. I expected
LINE 37: you to stay two months. I told Mrs. Collins so before you came. There
LINE 38: can be no occasion for your going so soon. Mrs. Bennet could certainly
LINE 39: spare you for another fortnight."
LINE 40: "But my father cannot. He wrote last week to hurry my return."
LINE 41: [Illustration:
LINE 42: "Dawson"
LINE 43: [_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]
LINE 44: "Oh, your father, of course, may spare you, if your mother can.
LINE 45: Daughters are never of so much consequence to a father. And if you will
LINE 46: stay another _month_ complete, it will be in my power to take one of you
LINE 47: as far as London, for I am going there early in June, for a week; and
LINE 48: as Dawson does not object to the barouche-box, there will be very good
LINE 49: room for one of you--and, indeed, if the weather should happen to be
LINE 50: cool, I should not object to taking you both, as you are neither of you
LINE 51: large."
LINE 52: "You are all kindness, madam; but I believe we must abide by our
LINE 53: original plan."
LINE 54: Lady Catherine seemed resigned. "Mrs. Collins, you must send a servant
LINE 55: with them. You know I always speak my mind, and I cannot bear the idea
LINE 56: of two young women travelling post by themselves. It is highly improper.
LINE 57: You must contrive to send somebody. I have the greatest dislike in the
LINE 58: world to that sort of thing. Young women should always be properly
LINE 59: guarded and attended, according to their situation in life. When my
LINE 60: niece Georgiana went to Ramsgate last summer, I made a point of her
LINE 61: having two men-servants go with her. Miss Darcy, the daughter of Mr.
LINE 62: Darcy of Pemberley, and Lady Anne, could not have appeared with
LINE 63: propriety in a different manner. I am excessively attentive to all those
LINE 64: things. You must send John with the young ladies, Mrs. Collins. I am
LINE 65: glad it occurred to me to mention it; for it would really be
LINE 66: discreditable to _you_ to let them go alone."
LINE 67: "My uncle is to send a servant for us."
LINE 68: "Oh! Your uncle! He keeps a man-servant, does he? I am very glad you
LINE 69: have somebody who thinks of those things. Where shall you change horses?
LINE 70: Oh, Bromley, of course. If you mention my name at the Bell, you will be
LINE 71: attended to."
LINE 72: Lady Catherine had many other questions to ask respecting their journey;
LINE 73: and as she did not answer them all herself attention was
LINE 74: necessary--which Elizabeth believed to be lucky for her; or, with a
LINE 75: mind so occupied, she might have forgotten where she was. Reflection
LINE 76: must be reserved for solitary hours: whenever she was alone, she gave
LINE 77: way to it as the greatest relief; and not a day went by without a
LINE 78: solitary walk, in which she might indulge in all the delight of
LINE 79: unpleasant recollections.
LINE 80: Mr. Darcy's letter she was in a fair way of soon knowing by heart. She
LINE 81: studied every sentence; and her feelings towards its writer were at
LINE 82: times widely different. When she remembered the style of his address,
LINE 83: she was still full of indignation: but when she considered how unjustly
LINE 84: she had condemned and upbraided him, her anger was turned against
LINE 85: herself; and his disappointed feelings became the object of compassion.
LINE 86: His attachment excited gratitude, his general character respect: but she
LINE 87: could not approve him; nor could she for a moment repent her refusal, or
LINE 88: feel the slightest inclination ever to see him again. In her own past
LINE 89: behaviour, there was a constant source of vexation and regret: and in
LINE 90: the unhappy defects of her family, a subject of yet heavier chagrin.
LINE 91: They were hopeless of remedy. Her father, contented with laughing at
LINE 92: them, would never exert himself to restrain the wild giddiness of his
LINE 93: youngest daughters; and her mother, with manners so far from right
LINE 94: herself, was entirely insensible of the evil. Elizabeth had frequently
LINE 95: united with Jane in an endeavour to check the imprudence of Catherine
LINE 96: and Lydia; but while they were supported by their mother's indulgence,
LINE 97: what chance could there be of improvement? Catherine, weak-spirited,
LINE 98: irritable, and completely under Lydia's guidance, had been always
LINE 99: affronted by their advice; and Lydia, self-willed and careless, would
LINE 100: scarcely give them a hearing. They were ignorant, idle, and vain. While
LINE 101: there was an officer in Meryton, they would flirt with him; and while
LINE 102: Meryton was within a walk of Longbourn, they would be going there for
LINE 103: ever.
LINE 104: Anxiety on Jane's behalf was another prevailing concern; and Mr. Darcy's
LINE 105: explanation, by restoring Bingley to all her former good opinion,
LINE 106: heightened the sense of what Jane had lost. His affection was proved to
LINE 107: have been sincere, and his conduct cleared of all blame, unless any
LINE 108: could attach to the implicitness of his confidence in his friend. How
LINE 109: grievous then was the thought that, of a situation so desirable in every
LINE 110: respect, so replete with advantage, so promising for happiness, Jane had
LINE 111: been deprived, by the folly and indecorum of her own family!
LINE 112: When to these recollections was added the development of Wickham's
LINE 113: character, it may be easily believed that the happy spirits which had
LINE 114: seldom been depressed before were now so much affected as to make it
LINE 115: almost impossible for her to appear tolerably cheerful.
LINE 116: Their engagements at Rosings were as frequent during the last week of
LINE 117: her stay as they had been at first. The very last evening was spent
LINE 118: there; and her Ladyship again inquired minutely into the particulars of
LINE 119: their journey, gave them directions as to the best method of packing,
LINE 120: and was so urgent on the necessity of placing gowns in the only right
LINE 121: way, that Maria thought herself obliged, on her return, to undo all the
LINE 122: work of the morning, and pack her trunk afresh.
LINE 123: When they parted, Lady Catherine, with great condescension, wished them
LINE 124: a good journey, and invited them to come to Hunsford again next year;
LINE 125: and Miss de Bourgh exerted herself so far as to courtesy and hold out
LINE 126: her hand to both.
LINE 127: [Illustration:
LINE 128: "The elevation of his feelings."
LINE 129: ]