LINE 1: [Illustration]
LINE 2: In consequence of an agreement between the sisters, Elizabeth wrote the
LINE 3: next morning to her mother, to beg that the carriage might be sent for
LINE 4: them in the course of the day. But Mrs. Bennet, who had calculated on
LINE 5: her daughters remaining at Netherfield till the following Tuesday, which
LINE 6: would exactly finish Jane's week, could not bring herself to receive
LINE 7: them with pleasure before. Her answer, therefore, was not propitious, at
LINE 8: least not to Elizabeth's wishes, for she was impatient to get home. Mrs.
LINE 9: Bennet sent them word that they could not possibly have the carriage
LINE 10: before Tuesday; and in her postscript it was added, that if Mr. Bingley
LINE 11: and his sister pressed them to stay longer, she could spare them very
LINE 12: well. Against staying longer, however, Elizabeth was positively
LINE 13: resolved--nor did she much expect it would be asked; and fearful, on the
LINE 14: contrary, of being considered as intruding themselves needlessly long,
LINE 15: she urged Jane to borrow Mr. Bingley's carriage immediately, and at
LINE 16: length it was settled that their original design of leaving Netherfield
LINE 17: that morning should be mentioned, and the request made.
LINE 18: The communication excited many professions of concern; and enough was
LINE 19: said of wishing them to stay at least till the following day to work on
LINE 20: Jane; and till the morrow their going was deferred. Miss Bingley was
LINE 21: then sorry that she had proposed the delay; for her jealousy and dislike
LINE 22: of one sister much exceeded her affection for the other.
LINE 23: The master of the house heard with real sorrow that they were to go so
LINE 24: soon, and repeatedly tried to persuade Miss Bennet that it would not be
LINE 25: safe for her--that she was not enough recovered; but Jane was firm where
LINE 26: she felt herself to be right.
LINE 27: To Mr. Darcy it was welcome intelligence: Elizabeth had been at
LINE 28: Netherfield long enough. She attracted him more than he liked; and Miss
LINE 29: Bingley was uncivil to _her_ and more teasing than usual to himself. He
LINE 30: wisely resolved to be particularly careful that no sign of admiration
LINE 31: should _now_ escape him--nothing that could elevate her with the hope of
LINE 32: influencing his felicity; sensible that, if such an idea had been
LINE 33: suggested, his behaviour during the last day must have material weight
LINE 34: in confirming or crushing it. Steady to his purpose, he scarcely spoke
LINE 35: ten words to her through the whole of Saturday: and though they were at
LINE 36: one time left by themselves for half an hour, he adhered most
LINE 37: conscientiously to his book, and would not even look at her.
LINE 38: On Sunday, after morning service, the separation, so agreeable to almost
LINE 39: all, took place. Miss Bingley's civility to Elizabeth increased at last
LINE 40: very rapidly, as well as her affection for Jane; and when they parted,
LINE 41: after assuring the latter of the pleasure it would always give her to
LINE 42: see her either at Longbourn or Netherfield, and embracing her most
LINE 43: tenderly, she even shook hands with the former. Elizabeth took leave of
LINE 44: the whole party in the liveliest spirits.
LINE 45: They were not welcomed home very cordially by their mother. Mrs. Bennet
LINE 46: wondered at their coming, and thought them very wrong to give so much
LINE 47: trouble, and was sure Jane would have caught cold again. But their
LINE 48: father, though very laconic in his expressions of pleasure, was really
LINE 49: glad to see them; he had felt their importance in the family circle. The
LINE 50: evening conversation, when they were all assembled, had lost much of its
LINE 51: animation, and almost all its sense, by the absence of Jane and
LINE 52: Elizabeth.
LINE 53: They found Mary, as usual, deep in the study of thorough bass and human
LINE 54: nature; and had some new extracts to admire and some new observations of
LINE 55: threadbare morality to listen to. Catherine and Lydia had information
LINE 56: for them of a different sort. Much had been done, and much had been said
LINE 57: in the regiment since the preceding Wednesday; several of the officers
LINE 58: had dined lately with their uncle; a private had been flogged; and it
LINE 59: had actually been hinted that Colonel Forster was going to be married.
LINE 60: [Illustration]