LINE 1: [Illustration]
LINE 2: It was the second week in May, in which the three young ladies set out
LINE 3: together from Gracechurch Street for the town of ----, in Hertfordshire;
LINE 4: and, as they drew near the appointed inn where Mr. Bennet's carriage was
LINE 5: to meet them, they quickly perceived, in token of the coachman's
LINE 6: punctuality, both Kitty and Lydia looking out of a dining-room upstairs.
LINE 7: These two girls had been above an hour in the place, happily employed
LINE 8: in visiting an opposite milliner, watching the sentinel on guard, and
LINE 9: dressing a salad and cucumber.
LINE 10: After welcoming their sisters, they triumphantly displayed a table set
LINE 11: out with such cold meat as an inn larder usually affords, exclaiming,
LINE 12: "Is not this nice? is not this an agreeable surprise?"
LINE 13: "And we mean to treat you all," added Lydia; "but you must lend us the
LINE 14: money, for we have just spent ours at the shop out there." Then showing
LINE 15: her purchases,--"Look here, I have bought this bonnet. I do not think it
LINE 16: is very pretty; but I thought I might as well buy it as not. I shall
LINE 17: pull it to pieces as soon as I get home, and see if I can make it up any
LINE 18: better."
LINE 19: And when her sisters abused it as ugly, she added, with perfect
LINE 20: unconcern, "Oh, but there were two or three much uglier in the shop; and
LINE 21: when I have bought some prettier-coloured satin to trim it with fresh, I
LINE 22: think it will be very tolerable. Besides, it will not much signify what
LINE 23: one wears this summer, after the ----shire have left Meryton, and they
LINE 24: are going in a fortnight."
LINE 25: "Are they, indeed?" cried Elizabeth, with the greatest satisfaction.
LINE 26: "They are going to be encamped near Brighton; and I do so want papa to
LINE 27: take us all there for the summer! It would be such a delicious scheme,
LINE 28: and I dare say would hardly cost anything at all. Mamma would like to
LINE 29: go, too, of all things! Only think what a miserable summer else we shall
LINE 30: have!"
LINE 31: "Yes," thought Elizabeth; "_that_ would be a delightful scheme, indeed,
LINE 32: and completely do for us at once. Good Heaven! Brighton and a whole
LINE 33: campful of soldiers, to us, who have been overset already by one poor
LINE 34: regiment of militia, and the monthly balls of Meryton!"
LINE 35: "Now I have got some news for you," said Lydia, as they sat down to
LINE 36: table. "What do you think? It is excellent news, capital news, and about
LINE 37: a certain person that we all like."
LINE 38: Jane and Elizabeth looked at each other, and the waiter was told that he
LINE 39: need not stay. Lydia laughed, and said,--
LINE 40: "Ay, that is just like your formality and discretion. You thought the
LINE 41: waiter must not hear, as if he cared! I dare say he often hears worse
LINE 42: things said than I am going to say. But he is an ugly fellow! I am glad
LINE 43: he is gone. I never saw such a long chin in my life. Well, but now for
LINE 44: my news: it is about dear Wickham; too good for the waiter, is not it?
LINE 45: There is no danger of Wickham's marrying Mary King--there's for you! She
LINE 46: is gone down to her uncle at Liverpool; gone to stay. Wickham is safe."
LINE 47: "And Mary King is safe!" added Elizabeth; "safe from a connection
LINE 48: imprudent as to fortune."
LINE 49: "She is a great fool for going away, if she liked him."
LINE 50: "But I hope there is no strong attachment on either side," said Jane.
LINE 51: "I am sure there is not on _his_. I will answer for it, he never cared
LINE 52: three straws about her. Who _could_ about such a nasty little freckled
LINE 53: thing?"
LINE 54: Elizabeth was shocked to think that, however incapable of such
LINE 55: coarseness of _expression_ herself, the coarseness of the _sentiment_
LINE 56: was little other than her own breast had formerly harboured and fancied
LINE 57: liberal!
LINE 58: As soon as all had ate, and the elder ones paid, the carriage was
LINE 59: ordered; and, after some contrivance, the whole party, with all their
LINE 60: boxes, workbags, and parcels, and the unwelcome addition of Kitty's and
LINE 61: Lydia's purchases, were seated in it.
LINE 62: "How nicely we are crammed in!" cried Lydia. "I am glad I brought my
LINE 63: bonnet, if it is only for the fun of having another band-box! Well, now
LINE 64: let us be quite comfortable and snug, and talk and laugh all the way
LINE 65: home. And in the first place, let us hear what has happened to you all
LINE 66: since you went away. Have you seen any pleasant men? Have you had any
LINE 67: flirting? I was in great hopes that one of you would have got a husband
LINE 68: before you came back. Jane will be quite an old maid soon, I declare.
LINE 69: She is almost three-and-twenty! Lord! how ashamed I should be of not
LINE 70: being married before three-and-twenty! My aunt Philips wants you so to
LINE 71: get husbands you can't think. She says Lizzy had better have taken Mr.
LINE 72: Collins; but _I_ do not think there would have been any fun in it. Lord!
LINE 73: how I should like to be married before any of you! and then I would
LINE 74: _chaperon_ you about to all the balls. Dear me! we had such a good piece
LINE 75: of fun the other day at Colonel Forster's! Kitty and me were to spend
LINE 76: the day there, and Mrs. Forster promised to have a little dance in the
LINE 77: evening; (by-the-bye, Mrs. Forster and me are _such_ friends!) and so
LINE 78: she asked the two Harringtons to come: but Harriet was ill, and so Pen
LINE 79: was forced to come by herself; and then, what do you think we did? We
LINE 80: dressed up Chamberlayne in woman's clothes, on purpose to pass for a
LINE 81: lady,--only think what fun! Not a soul knew of it, but Colonel and Mrs.
LINE 82: Forster, and Kitty and me, except my aunt, for we were forced to borrow
LINE 83: one of her gowns; and you cannot imagine how well he looked! When Denny,
LINE 84: and Wickham, and Pratt, and two or three more of the men came in, they
LINE 85: did not know him in the least. Lord! how I laughed! and so did Mrs.
LINE 86: Forster. I thought I should have died. And _that_ made the men suspect
LINE 87: something, and then they soon found out what was the matter."
LINE 88: With such kind of histories of their parties and good jokes did Lydia,
LINE 89: assisted by Kitty's hints and additions, endeavour to amuse her
LINE 90: companions all the way to Longbourn. Elizabeth listened as little as she
LINE 91: could, but there was no escaping the frequent mention of Wickham's name.
LINE 92: Their reception at home was most kind. Mrs. Bennet rejoiced to see Jane
LINE 93: in undiminished beauty; and more than once during dinner did Mr. Bennet
LINE 94: say voluntarily to Elizabeth,----
LINE 95: "I am glad you are come back, Lizzy."
LINE 96: Their party in the dining-room was large, for almost all the Lucases
LINE 97: came to meet Maria and hear the news; and various were the subjects
LINE 98: which occupied them: Lady Lucas was inquiring of Maria, across the
LINE 99: table, after the welfare and poultry of her eldest daughter; Mrs. Bennet
LINE 100: was doubly engaged, on one hand collecting an account of the present
LINE 101: fashions from Jane, who sat some way below her, and on the other,
LINE 102: retailing them all to the younger Miss Lucases; and Lydia, in a voice
LINE 103: rather louder than any other person's, was enumerating the various
LINE 104: pleasures of the morning to anybody who would hear her.
LINE 105: "Oh, Mary," said she, "I wish you had gone with us, for we had such fun!
LINE 106: as we went along Kitty and me drew up all the blinds, and pretended
LINE 107: there was nobody in the coach; and I should have gone so all the way, if
LINE 108: Kitty had not been sick; and when we got to the George, I do think we
LINE 109: behaved very handsomely, for we treated the other three with the nicest
LINE 110: cold luncheon in the world, and if you would have gone, we would have
LINE 111: treated you too. And then when we came away it was such fun! I thought
LINE 112: we never should have got into the coach. I was ready to die of laughter.
LINE 113: And then we were so merry all the way home! we talked and laughed so
LINE 114: loud, that anybody might have heard us ten miles off!"
LINE 115: To this, Mary very gravely replied, "Far be it from me, my dear sister,
LINE 116: to depreciate such pleasures. They would doubtless be congenial with the
LINE 117: generality of female minds. But I confess they would have no charms for
LINE 118: _me_. I should infinitely prefer a book."
LINE 119: But of this answer Lydia heard not a word. She seldom listened to
LINE 120: anybody for more than half a minute, and never attended to Mary at all.
LINE 121: In the afternoon Lydia was urgent with the rest of the girls to walk to
LINE 122: Meryton, and see how everybody went on; but Elizabeth steadily opposed
LINE 123: the scheme. It should not be said, that the Miss Bennets could not be at
LINE 124: home half a day before they were in pursuit of the officers. There was
LINE 125: another reason, too, for her opposition. She dreaded seeing Wickham
LINE 126: again, and was resolved to avoid it as long as possible. The comfort to
LINE 127: _her_, of the regiment's approaching removal, was indeed beyond
LINE 128: expression. In a fortnight they were to go, and once gone, she hoped
LINE 129: there could be nothing more to plague her on his account.
LINE 130: She had not been many hours at home, before she found that the Brighton
LINE 131: scheme, of which Lydia had given them a hint at the inn, was under
LINE 132: frequent discussion between her parents. Elizabeth saw directly that her
LINE 133: father had not the smallest intention of yielding; but his answers were
LINE 134: at the same time so vague and equivocal, that her mother, though often
LINE 135: disheartened, had never yet despaired of succeeding at last.
LINE 136: [Illustration]