LINE 1: [Illustration]
LINE 2: Mr. Collins was not left long to the silent contemplation of his
LINE 3: successful love; for Mrs. Bennet, having dawdled about in the vestibule
LINE 4: to watch for the end of the conference, no sooner saw Elizabeth open the
LINE 5: door and with quick step pass her towards the staircase, than she
LINE 6: entered the breakfast-room, and congratulated both him and herself in
LINE 7: warm terms on the happy prospect of their nearer connection. Mr. Collins
LINE 8: received and returned these felicitations with equal pleasure, and then
LINE 9: proceeded to relate the particulars of their interview, with the result
LINE 10: of which he trusted he had every reason to be satisfied, since the
LINE 11: refusal which his cousin had steadfastly given him would naturally flow
LINE 12: from her bashful modesty and the genuine delicacy of her character.
LINE 13: This information, however, startled Mrs. Bennet: she would have been
LINE 14: glad to be equally satisfied that her daughter had meant to encourage
LINE 15: him by protesting against his proposals, but she dared not believe it,
LINE 16: and could not help saying so.
LINE 17: "But depend upon it, Mr. Collins," she added, "that Lizzy shall be
LINE 18: brought to reason. I will speak to her about it myself directly. She is
LINE 19: a very headstrong, foolish girl, and does not know her own interest; but
LINE 20: I will _make_ her know it."
LINE 21: "Pardon me for interrupting you, madam," cried Mr. Collins; "but if she
LINE 22: is really headstrong and foolish, I know not whether she would
LINE 23: altogether be a very desirable wife to a man in my situation, who
LINE 24: naturally looks for happiness in the marriage state. If, therefore, she
LINE 25: actually persists in rejecting my suit, perhaps it were better not to
LINE 26: force her into accepting me, because, if liable to such defects of
LINE 27: temper, she could not contribute much to my felicity."
LINE 28: "Sir, you quite misunderstand me," said Mrs. Bennet, alarmed. "Lizzy is
LINE 29: only headstrong in such matters as these. In everything else she is as
LINE 30: good-natured a girl as ever lived. I will go directly to Mr. Bennet, and
LINE 31: we shall very soon settle it with her, I am sure."
LINE 32: She would not give him time to reply, but hurrying instantly to her
LINE 33: husband, called out, as she entered the library,--
LINE 34: "Oh, Mr. Bennet, you are wanted immediately; we are all in an uproar.
LINE 35: You must come and make Lizzy marry Mr. Collins, for she vows she will
LINE 36: not have him; and if you do not make haste he will change his mind and
LINE 37: not have _her_."
LINE 38: Mr. Bennet raised his eyes from his book as she entered, and fixed them
LINE 39: on her face with a calm unconcern, which was not in the least altered by
LINE 40: her communication.
LINE 41: "I have not the pleasure of understanding you," said he, when she had
LINE 42: finished her speech. "Of what are you talking?"
LINE 43: "Of Mr. Collins and Lizzy. Lizzy declares she will not have Mr. Collins,
LINE 44: and Mr. Collins begins to say that he will not have Lizzy."
LINE 45: "And what am I to do on the occasion? It seems a hopeless business."
LINE 46: "Speak to Lizzy about it yourself. Tell her that you insist upon her
LINE 47: marrying him."
LINE 48: "Let her be called down. She shall hear my opinion."
LINE 49: Mrs. Bennet rang the bell, and Miss Elizabeth was summoned to the
LINE 50: library.
LINE 51: "Come here, child," cried her father as she appeared. "I have sent for
LINE 52: you on an affair of importance. I understand that Mr. Collins has made
LINE 53: you an offer of marriage. Is it true?"
LINE 54: Elizabeth replied that it was.
LINE 55: "Very well--and this offer of marriage you have refused?"
LINE 56: "I have, sir."
LINE 57: "Very well. We now come to the point. Your mother insists upon your
LINE 58: accepting it. Is it not so, Mrs. Bennet?"
LINE 59: "Yes, or I will never see her again."
LINE 60: "An unhappy alternative is before you, Elizabeth. From this day you must
LINE 61: be a stranger to one of your parents. Your mother will never see you
LINE 62: again if you do _not_ marry Mr. Collins, and I will never see you again
LINE 63: if you _do_."
LINE 64: Elizabeth could not but smile at such a conclusion of such a beginning;
LINE 65: but Mrs. Bennet, who had persuaded herself that her husband regarded the
LINE 66: affair as she wished, was excessively disappointed.
LINE 67: "What do you mean, Mr. Bennet, by talking in this way? You promised me
LINE 68: to _insist_ upon her marrying him."
LINE 69: "My dear," replied her husband, "I have two small favours to request.
LINE 70: First, that you will allow me the free use of my understanding on the
LINE 71: present occasion; and, secondly, of my room. I shall be glad to have the
LINE 72: library to myself as soon as may be."
LINE 73: Not yet, however, in spite of her disappointment in her husband, did
LINE 74: Mrs. Bennet give up the point. She talked to Elizabeth again and again;
LINE 75: coaxed and threatened her by turns. She endeavoured to secure Jane in
LINE 76: her interest, but Jane, with all possible mildness, declined
LINE 77: interfering; and Elizabeth, sometimes with real earnestness, and
LINE 78: sometimes with playful gaiety, replied to her attacks. Though her manner
LINE 79: varied, however, her determination never did.
LINE 80: Mr. Collins, meanwhile, was meditating in solitude on what had passed.
LINE 81: He thought too well of himself to comprehend on what motive his cousin
LINE 82: could refuse him; and though his pride was hurt, he suffered in no other
LINE 83: way. His regard for her was quite imaginary; and the possibility of her
LINE 84: deserving her mother's reproach prevented his feeling any regret.
LINE 85: While the family were in this confusion, Charlotte Lucas came to spend
LINE 86: the day with them. She was met in the vestibule by Lydia, who, flying to
LINE 87: her, cried in a half whisper, "I am glad you are come, for there is such
LINE 88: fun here! What do you think has happened this morning? Mr. Collins has
LINE 89: made an offer to Lizzy, and she will not have him."
LINE 90: [Illustration:
LINE 91: "they entered the breakfast room"
LINE 92: ]
LINE 93: Charlotte had hardly time to answer before they were joined by Kitty,
LINE 94: who came to tell the same news; and no sooner had they entered the
LINE 95: breakfast-room, where Mrs. Bennet was alone, than she likewise began on
LINE 96: the subject, calling on Miss Lucas for her compassion, and entreating
LINE 97: her to persuade her friend Lizzy to comply with the wishes of her
LINE 98: family. "Pray do, my dear Miss Lucas," she added, in a melancholy tone;
LINE 99: "for nobody is on my side, nobody takes part with me; I am cruelly used,
LINE 100: nobody feels for my poor nerves."
LINE 101: Charlotte's reply was spared by the entrance of Jane and Elizabeth.
LINE 102: "Ay, there she comes," continued Mrs. Bennet, "looking as unconcerned as
LINE 103: may be, and caring no more for us than if we were at York, provided she
LINE 104: can have her own way. But I tell you what, Miss Lizzy, if you take it
LINE 105: into your head to go on refusing every offer of marriage in this way,
LINE 106: you will never get a husband at all--and I am sure I do not know who is
LINE 107: to maintain you when your father is dead. _I_ shall not be able to keep
LINE 108: you--and so I warn you. I have done with you from this very day. I told
LINE 109: you in the library, you know, that I should never speak to you again,
LINE 110: and you will find me as good as my word. I have no pleasure in talking
LINE 111: to undutiful children. Not that I have much pleasure, indeed, in talking
LINE 112: to anybody. People who suffer as I do from nervous complaints can have
LINE 113: no great inclination for talking. Nobody can tell what I suffer! But it
LINE 114: is always so. Those who do not complain are never pitied."
LINE 115: Her daughters listened in silence to this effusion, sensible that any
LINE 116: attempt to reason with or soothe her would only increase the irritation.
LINE 117: She talked on, therefore, without interruption from any of them till
LINE 118: they were joined by Mr. Collins, who entered with an air more stately
LINE 119: than usual, and on perceiving whom, she said to the girls,--
LINE 120: "Now, I do insist upon it, that you, all of you, hold your tongues, and
LINE 121: let Mr. Collins and me have a little conversation together."
LINE 122: Elizabeth passed quietly out of the room, Jane and Kitty followed, but
LINE 123: Lydia stood her ground, determined to hear all she could; and Charlotte,
LINE 124: detained first by the civility of Mr. Collins, whose inquiries after
LINE 125: herself and all her family were very minute, and then by a little
LINE 126: curiosity, satisfied herself with walking to the window and pretending
LINE 127: not to hear. In a doleful voice Mrs. Bennet thus began the projected
LINE 128: conversation:--
LINE 129: "Oh, Mr. Collins!"
LINE 130: "My dear madam," replied he, "let us be for ever silent on this point.
LINE 131: Far be it from me," he presently continued, in a voice that marked his
LINE 132: displeasure, "to resent the behaviour of your daughter. Resignation to
LINE 133: inevitable evils is the duty of us all: the peculiar duty of a young man
LINE 134: who has been so fortunate as I have been, in early preferment; and, I
LINE 135: trust, I am resigned. Perhaps not the less so from feeling a doubt of my
LINE 136: positive happiness had my fair cousin honoured me with her hand; for I
LINE 137: have often observed, that resignation is never so perfect as when the
LINE 138: blessing denied begins to lose somewhat of its value in our estimation.
LINE 139: You will not, I hope, consider me as showing any disrespect to your
LINE 140: family, my dear madam, by thus withdrawing my pretensions to your
LINE 141: daughter's favour, without having paid yourself and Mr. Bennet the
LINE 142: compliment of requesting you to interpose your authority in my behalf.
LINE 143: My conduct may, I fear, be objectionable in having accepted my
LINE 144: dismission from your daughter's lips instead of your own; but we are all
LINE 145: liable to error. I have certainly meant well through the whole affair.
LINE 146: My object has been to secure an amiable companion for myself, with due
LINE 147: consideration for the advantage of all your family; and if my _manner_
LINE 148: has been at all reprehensible, I here beg leave to apologize."
LINE 149: [Illustration]