LINE 1: [Illustration]
LINE 2: Elizabeth's spirits soon rising to playfulness again, she wanted Mr.
LINE 3: Darcy to account for his having ever fallen in love with her. "How could
LINE 4: you begin?" said she. "I can comprehend your going on charmingly, when
LINE 5: you had once made a beginning; but what could set you off in the first
LINE 6: place?"
LINE 7: "I cannot fix on the hour, or the spot, or the look, or the words, which
LINE 8: laid the foundation. It is too long ago. I was in the middle before I
LINE 9: knew that I _had_ begun."
LINE 10: "My beauty you had early withstood, and as for my manners--my behaviour
LINE 11: to _you_ was at least always bordering on the uncivil, and I never spoke
LINE 12: to you without rather wishing to give you pain than not. Now, be
LINE 13: sincere; did you admire me for my impertinence?"
LINE 14: "For the liveliness of your mind I did."
LINE 15: "You may as well call it impertinence at once. It was very little less.
LINE 16: The fact is, that you were sick of civility, of deference, of officious
LINE 17: attention. You were disgusted with the women who were always speaking,
LINE 18: and looking, and thinking for _your_ approbation alone. I roused and
LINE 19: interested you, because I was so unlike _them_. Had you not been really
LINE 20: amiable you would have hated me for it: but in spite of the pains you
LINE 21: took to disguise yourself, your feelings were always noble and just; and
LINE 22: in your heart you thoroughly despised the persons who so assiduously
LINE 23: courted you. There--I have saved you the trouble of accounting for it;
LINE 24: and really, all things considered, I begin to think it perfectly
LINE 25: reasonable. To be sure you know no actual good of me--but nobody thinks
LINE 26: of _that_ when they fall in love."
LINE 27: "Was there no good in your affectionate behaviour to Jane, while she was
LINE 28: ill at Netherfield?"
LINE 29: "Dearest Jane! who could have done less for her? But make a virtue of it
LINE 30: by all means. My good qualities are under your protection, and you are
LINE 31: to exaggerate them as much as possible; and, in return, it belongs to me
LINE 32: to find occasions for teasing and quarrelling with you as often as may
LINE 33: be; and I shall begin directly, by asking you what made you so unwilling
LINE 34: to come to the point at last? What made you so shy of me, when you
LINE 35: first called, and afterwards dined here? Why, especially, when you
LINE 36: called, did you look as if you did not care about me?"
LINE 37: "Because you were grave and silent, and gave me no encouragement."
LINE 38: "But I was embarrassed."
LINE 39: "And so was I."
LINE 40: "You might have talked to me more when you came to dinner."
LINE 41: "A man who had felt less might."
LINE 42: "How unlucky that you should have a reasonable answer to give, and that
LINE 43: I should be so reasonable as to admit it! But I wonder how long you
LINE 44: _would_ have gone on, if you had been left to yourself. I wonder when
LINE 45: you _would_ have spoken if I had not asked you! My resolution of
LINE 46: thanking you for your kindness to Lydia had certainly great effect. _Too
LINE 47: much_, I am afraid; for what becomes of the moral, if our comfort
LINE 48: springs from a breach of promise, for I ought not to have mentioned the
LINE 49: subject? This will never do."
LINE 50: "You need not distress yourself. The moral will be perfectly fair. Lady
LINE 51: Catherine's unjustifiable endeavours to separate us were the means of
LINE 52: removing all my doubts. I am not indebted for my present happiness to
LINE 53: your eager desire of expressing your gratitude. I was not in a humour to
LINE 54: wait for an opening of yours. My aunt's intelligence had given me hope,
LINE 55: and I was determined at once to know everything."
LINE 56: "Lady Catherine has been of infinite use, which ought to make her happy,
LINE 57: for she loves to be of use. But tell me, what did you come down to
LINE 58: Netherfield for? Was it merely to ride to Longbourn and be embarrassed?
LINE 59: or had you intended any more serious consequences?"
LINE 60: "My real purpose was to see _you_, and to judge, if I could, whether I
LINE 61: might ever hope to make you love me. My avowed one, or what I avowed to
LINE 62: myself, was to see whether your sister was still partial to Bingley, and
LINE 63: if she were, to make the confession to him which I have since made."
LINE 64: "Shall you ever have courage to announce to Lady Catherine what is to
LINE 65: befall her?"
LINE 66: "I am more likely to want time than courage, Elizabeth. But it ought to
LINE 67: be done; and if you will give me a sheet of paper it shall be done
LINE 68: directly."
LINE 69: "And if I had not a letter to write myself, I might sit by you, and
LINE 70: admire the evenness of your writing, as another young lady once did. But
LINE 71: I have an aunt, too, who must not be longer neglected."
LINE 72: From an unwillingness to confess how much her intimacy with Mr. Darcy
LINE 73: had been overrated, Elizabeth had never yet answered Mrs. Gardiner's
LINE 74: long letter; but now, having _that_ to communicate which she knew would
LINE 75: be most welcome, she was almost ashamed to find that her uncle and aunt
LINE 76: had already lost three days of happiness, and immediately wrote as
LINE 77: follows:--
LINE 78: "I would have thanked you before, my dear aunt, as I ought to have done,
LINE 79: for your long, kind, satisfactory detail of particulars; but, to say the
LINE 80: truth, I was too cross to write. You supposed more than really existed.
LINE 81: But _now_ suppose as much as you choose; give a loose to your fancy,
LINE 82: indulge your imagination in every possible flight which the subject will
LINE 83: afford, and unless you believe me actually married, you cannot greatly
LINE 84: err. You must write again very soon, and praise him a great deal more
LINE 85: than you did in your last. I thank you again and again, for not going to
LINE 86: the Lakes. How could I be so silly as to wish it! Your idea of the
LINE 87: ponies is delightful. We will go round the park every day. I am the
LINE 88: happiest creature in the world. Perhaps other people have said so
LINE 89: before, but no one with such justice. I am happier even than Jane; she
LINE 90: only smiles, I laugh. Mr. Darcy sends you all the love in the world that
LINE 91: can be spared from me. You are all to come to Pemberley at Christmas.
LINE 92: Yours," etc.
LINE 93: Mr. Darcy's letter to Lady Catherine was in a different style, and still
LINE 94: different from either was what Mr. Bennet sent to Mr. Collins, in return
LINE 95: for his last.
LINE 96: /* "Dear Sir, */
LINE 97: "I must trouble you once more for congratulations. Elizabeth will
LINE 98: soon be the wife of Mr. Darcy. Console Lady Catherine as well as
LINE 99: you can. But, if I were you, I would stand by the nephew. He has
LINE 100: more to give.
LINE 101: "Yours sincerely," etc.
LINE 102: Miss Bingley's congratulations to her brother on his approaching
LINE 103: marriage were all that was affectionate and insincere. She wrote even to
LINE 104: Jane on the occasion, to express her delight, and repeat all her former
LINE 105: professions of regard. Jane was not deceived, but she was affected; and
LINE 106: though feeling no reliance on her, could not help writing her a much
LINE 107: kinder answer than she knew was deserved.
LINE 108: The joy which Miss Darcy expressed on receiving similar information was
LINE 109: as sincere as her brother's in sending it. Four sides of paper were
LINE 110: insufficient to contain all her delight, and all her earnest desire of
LINE 111: being loved by her sister.
LINE 112: Before any answer could arrive from Mr. Collins, or any congratulations
LINE 113: to Elizabeth from his wife, the Longbourn family heard that the
LINE 114: Collinses were come themselves to Lucas Lodge. The reason of this
LINE 115: sudden removal was soon evident. Lady Catherine had been rendered so
LINE 116: exceedingly angry by the contents of her nephew's letter, that
LINE 117: Charlotte, really rejoicing in the match, was anxious to get away till
LINE 118: the storm was blown over. At such a moment, the arrival of her friend
LINE 119: was a sincere pleasure to Elizabeth, though in the course of their
LINE 120: meetings she must sometimes think the pleasure dearly bought, when she
LINE 121: saw Mr. Darcy exposed to all the parading and obsequious civility of her
LINE 122: husband. He bore it, however, with admirable calmness. He could even
LINE 123: listen to Sir William Lucas, when he complimented him on carrying away
LINE 124: the brightest jewel of the country, and expressed his hopes of their all
LINE 125: meeting frequently at St. James's, with very decent composure. If he did
LINE 126: shrug his shoulders, it was not till Sir William was out of sight.
LINE 127: Mrs. Philips's vulgarity was another, and, perhaps, a greater tax on his
LINE 128: forbearance; and though Mrs. Philips, as well as her sister, stood in
LINE 129: too much awe of him to speak with the familiarity which Bingley's
LINE 130: good-humour encouraged; yet, whenever she _did_ speak, she must be
LINE 131: vulgar. Nor was her respect for him, though it made her more quiet, at
LINE 132: all likely to make her more elegant. Elizabeth did all she could to
LINE 133: shield him from the frequent notice of either, and was ever anxious to
LINE 134: keep him to herself, and to those of her family with whom he might
LINE 135: converse without mortification; and though the uncomfortable feelings
LINE 136: arising from all this took from the season of courtship much of its
LINE 137: pleasure, it added to the hope of the future; and she looked forward
LINE 138: with delight to the time when they should be removed from society so
LINE 139: little pleasing to either, to all the comfort and elegance of their
LINE 140: family party at Pemberley.
LINE 141: [Illustration]