LINE 1: [Illustration]
LINE 2: Elizabeth was sitting by herself the next morning, and writing to Jane,
LINE 3: while Mrs. Collins and Maria were gone on business into the village,
LINE 4: when she was startled by a ring at the door, the certain signal of a
LINE 5: visitor. As she had heard no carriage, she thought it not unlikely to be
LINE 6: Lady Catherine; and under that apprehension was putting away her
LINE 7: half-finished letter, that she might escape all impertinent questions,
LINE 8: when the door opened, and to her very great surprise Mr. Darcy, and Mr.
LINE 9: Darcy only, entered the room.
LINE 10: He seemed astonished too on finding her alone, and apologized for his
LINE 11: intrusion, by letting her know that he had understood all the ladies to
LINE 12: be within.
LINE 13: They then sat down, and when her inquiries after Rosings were made,
LINE 14: seemed in danger of sinking into total silence. It was absolutely
LINE 15: necessary, therefore, to think of something; and in this emergency
LINE 16: recollecting _when_ she had seen him last in Hertfordshire, and feeling
LINE 17: curious to know what he would say on the subject of their hasty
LINE 18: departure, she observed,--
LINE 19: "How very suddenly you all quitted Netherfield last November, Mr. Darcy!
LINE 20: It must have been a most agreeable surprise to Mr. Bingley to see you
LINE 21: all after him so soon; for, if I recollect right, he went but the day
LINE 22: before. He and his sisters were well, I hope, when you left London?"
LINE 23: "Perfectly so, I thank you."
LINE 24: She found that she was to receive no other answer; and, after a short
LINE 25: pause, added,--
LINE 26: "I think I have understood that Mr. Bingley has not much idea of ever
LINE 27: returning to Netherfield again?"
LINE 28: "I have never heard him say so; but it is probable that he may spend
LINE 29: very little of his time there in future. He has many friends, and he is
LINE 30: at a time of life when friends and engagements are continually
LINE 31: increasing."
LINE 32: "If he means to be but little at Netherfield, it would be better for the
LINE 33: neighbourhood that he should give up the place entirely, for then we
LINE 34: might possibly get a settled family there. But, perhaps, Mr. Bingley did
LINE 35: not take the house so much for the convenience of the neighbourhood as
LINE 36: for his own, and we must expect him to keep or quit it on the same
LINE 37: principle."
LINE 38: "I should not be surprised," said Darcy, "if he were to give it up as
LINE 39: soon as any eligible purchase offers."
LINE 40: Elizabeth made no answer. She was afraid of talking longer of his
LINE 41: friend; and, having nothing else to say, was now determined to leave the
LINE 42: trouble of finding a subject to him.
LINE 43: He took the hint and soon began with, "This seems a very comfortable
LINE 44: house. Lady Catherine, I believe, did a great deal to it when Mr.
LINE 45: Collins first came to Hunsford."
LINE 46: "I believe she did--and I am sure she could not have bestowed her
LINE 47: kindness on a more grateful object."
LINE 48: "Mr. Collins appears very fortunate in his choice of a wife."
LINE 49: "Yes, indeed; his friends may well rejoice in his having met with one of
LINE 50: the very few sensible women who would have accepted him, or have made
LINE 51: him happy if they had. My friend has an excellent understanding--though
LINE 52: I am not certain that I consider her marrying Mr. Collins as the wisest
LINE 53: thing she ever did. She seems perfectly happy, however; and, in a
LINE 54: prudential light, it is certainly a very good match for her."
LINE 55: "It must be very agreeable to her to be settled within so easy a
LINE 56: distance of her own family and friends."
LINE 57: "An easy distance do you call it? It is nearly fifty miles."
LINE 58: "And what is fifty miles of good road? Little more than half a day's
LINE 59: journey. Yes, I call it a very easy distance."
LINE 60: "I should never have considered the distance as one of the _advantages_
LINE 61: of the match," cried Elizabeth. "I should never have said Mrs. Collins
LINE 62: was settled _near_ her family."
LINE 63: "It is a proof of your own attachment to Hertfordshire. Anything beyond
LINE 64: the very neighbourhood of Longbourn, I suppose, would appear far."
LINE 65: As he spoke there was a sort of smile, which Elizabeth fancied she
LINE 66: understood; he must be supposing her to be thinking of Jane and
LINE 67: Netherfield, and she blushed as she answered,--
LINE 68: "I do not mean to say that a woman may not be settled too near her
LINE 69: family. The far and the near must be relative, and depend on many
LINE 70: varying circumstances. Where there is fortune to make the expense of
LINE 71: travelling unimportant, distance becomes no evil. But that is not the
LINE 72: case _here_. Mr. and Mrs. Collins have a comfortable income, but not
LINE 73: such a one as will allow of frequent journeys--and I am persuaded my
LINE 74: friend would not call herself _near_ her family under less than _half_
LINE 75: the present distance."
LINE 76: Mr. Darcy drew his chair a little towards her, and said, "_You_ cannot
LINE 77: have a right to such very strong local attachment. _You_ cannot have
LINE 78: been always at Longbourn."
LINE 79: Elizabeth looked surprised. The gentleman experienced some change of
LINE 80: feeling; he drew back his chair, took a newspaper from the table, and,
LINE 81: glancing over it, said, in a colder voice,--
LINE 82: "Are you pleased with Kent?"
LINE 83: A short dialogue on the subject of the country ensued, on either side
LINE 84: calm and concise--and soon put an end to by the entrance of Charlotte
LINE 85: and her sister, just returned from their walk. The _tête-à-tête_
LINE 86: surprised them. Mr. Darcy related the mistake which had occasioned his
LINE 87: intruding on Miss Bennet, and, after sitting a few minutes longer,
LINE 88: without saying much to anybody, went away.
LINE 89: [Illustration: "Accompanied by their aunt"
LINE 90: [_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]
LINE 91: "What can be the meaning of this?" said Charlotte, as soon as he was
LINE 92: gone. "My dear Eliza, he must be in love with you, or he would never
LINE 93: have called on us in this familiar way."
LINE 94: But when Elizabeth told of his silence, it did not seem very likely,
LINE 95: even to Charlotte's wishes, to be the case; and, after various
LINE 96: conjectures, they could at last only suppose his visit to proceed from
LINE 97: the difficulty of finding anything to do, which was the more probable
LINE 98: from the time of year. All field sports were over. Within doors there
LINE 99: was Lady Catherine, books, and a billiard table, but gentlemen cannot be
LINE 100: always within doors; and in the nearness of the Parsonage, or the
LINE 101: pleasantness of the walk to it, or of the people who lived in it, the
LINE 102: two cousins found a temptation from this period of walking thither
LINE 103: almost every day. They called at various times of the morning, sometimes
LINE 104: separately, sometimes together, and now and then accompanied by their
LINE 105: aunt. It was plain to them all that Colonel Fitzwilliam came because he
LINE 106: had pleasure in their society, a persuasion which of course recommended
LINE 107: him still more; and Elizabeth was reminded by her own satisfaction in
LINE 108: being with him, as well as by his evident admiration, of her former
LINE 109: favourite, George Wickham; and though, in comparing them, she saw there
LINE 110: was less captivating softness in Colonel Fitzwilliam's manners, she
LINE 111: believed he might have the best informed mind.
LINE 112: But why Mr. Darcy came so often to the Parsonage it was more difficult
LINE 113: to understand. It could not be for society, as he frequently sat there
LINE 114: ten minutes together without opening his lips; and when he did speak, it
LINE 115: seemed the effect of necessity rather than of choice--a sacrifice to
LINE 116: propriety, not a pleasure to himself. He seldom appeared really
LINE 117: animated. Mrs. Collins knew not what to make of him. Colonel
LINE 118: Fitzwilliam's occasionally laughing at his stupidity proved that he was
LINE 119: generally different, which her own knowledge of him could not have told
LINE 120: her; and as she would have liked to believe this change the effect of
LINE 121: love, and the object of that love her friend Eliza, she set herself
LINE 122: seriously to work to find it out: she watched him whenever they were at
LINE 123: Rosings, and whenever he came to Hunsford; but without much success. He
LINE 124: certainly looked at her friend a great deal, but the expression of that
LINE 125: look was disputable. It was an earnest, steadfast gaze, but she often
LINE 126: doubted whether there were much admiration in it, and sometimes it
LINE 127: seemed nothing but absence of mind.
LINE 128: She had once or twice suggested to Elizabeth the possibility of his
LINE 129: being partial to her, but Elizabeth always laughed at the idea; and Mrs.
LINE 130: Collins did not think it right to press the subject, from the danger of
LINE 131: raising expectations which might only end in disappointment; for in her
LINE 132: opinion it admitted not of a doubt, that all her friend's dislike would
LINE 133: vanish, if she could suppose him to be in her power.
LINE 134: In her kind schemes for Elizabeth, she sometimes planned her marrying
LINE 135: Colonel Fitzwilliam. He was, beyond comparison, the pleasantest man: he
LINE 136: certainly admired her, and his situation in life was most eligible; but,
LINE 137: to counterbalance these advantages, Mr. Darcy had considerable patronage
LINE 138: in the church, and his cousin could have none at all.
LINE 139: [Illustration: "On looking up"]