LINE 1: [Illustration]
LINE 2: Mr. Collins was not a sensible man, and the deficiency of nature had
LINE 3: been but little assisted by education or society; the greatest part of
LINE 4: his life having been spent under the guidance of an illiterate and
LINE 5: miserly father; and though he belonged to one of the universities, he
LINE 6: had merely kept the necessary terms without forming at it any useful
LINE 7: acquaintance. The subjection in which his father had brought him up had
LINE 8: given him originally great humility of manner; but it was now a good
LINE 9: deal counteracted by the self-conceit of a weak head, living in
LINE 10: retirement, and the consequential feelings of early and unexpected
LINE 11: prosperity. A fortunate chance had recommended him to Lady Catherine de
LINE 12: Bourgh when the living of Hunsford was vacant; and the respect which he
LINE 13: felt for her high rank, and his veneration for her as his patroness,
LINE 14: mingling with a very good opinion of himself, of his authority as a
LINE 15: clergyman, and his right as a rector, made him altogether a mixture of
LINE 16: pride and obsequiousness, self-importance and humility.
LINE 17: Having now a good house and a very sufficient income, he intended to
LINE 18: marry; and in seeking a reconciliation with the Longbourn family he had
LINE 19: a wife in view, as he meant to choose one of the daughters, if he found
LINE 20: them as handsome and amiable as they were represented by common report.
LINE 21: This was his plan of amends--of atonement--for inheriting their father's
LINE 22: estate; and he thought it an excellent one, full of eligibility and
LINE 23: suitableness, and excessively generous and disinterested on his own
LINE 24: part.
LINE 25: His plan did not vary on seeing them. Miss Bennet's lovely face
LINE 26: confirmed his views, and established all his strictest notions of what
LINE 27: was due to seniority; and for the first evening _she_ was his settled
LINE 28: choice. The next morning, however, made an alteration; for in a quarter
LINE 29: of an hour's _tête-à-tête_ with Mrs. Bennet before breakfast, a
LINE 30: conversation beginning with his parsonage-house, and leading naturally
LINE 31: to the avowal of his hopes, that a mistress for it might be found at
LINE 32: Longbourn, produced from her, amid very complaisant smiles and general
LINE 33: encouragement, a caution against the very Jane he had fixed on. "As to
LINE 34: her _younger_ daughters, she could not take upon her to say--she could
LINE 35: not positively answer--but she did not _know_ of any prepossession;--her
LINE 36: _eldest_ daughter she must just mention--she felt it incumbent on her to
LINE 37: hint, was likely to be very soon engaged."
LINE 38: Mr. Collins had only to change from Jane to Elizabeth--and it was soon
LINE 39: done--done while Mrs. Bennet was stirring the fire. Elizabeth, equally
LINE 40: next to Jane in birth and beauty, succeeded her of course.
LINE 41: Mrs. Bennet treasured up the hint, and trusted that she might soon have
LINE 42: two daughters married; and the man whom she could not bear to speak of
LINE 43: the day before, was now high in her good graces.
LINE 44: Lydia's intention of walking to Meryton was not forgotten: every sister
LINE 45: except Mary agreed to go with her; and Mr. Collins was to attend them,
LINE 46: at the request of Mr. Bennet, who was most anxious to get rid of him,
LINE 47: and have his library to himself; for thither Mr. Collins had followed
LINE 48: him after breakfast, and there he would continue, nominally engaged with
LINE 49: one of the largest folios in the collection, but really talking to Mr.
LINE 50: Bennet, with little cessation, of his house and garden at Hunsford. Such
LINE 51: doings discomposed Mr. Bennet exceedingly. In his library he had been
LINE 52: always sure of leisure and tranquillity; and though prepared, as he told
LINE 53: Elizabeth, to meet with folly and conceit in every other room in the
LINE 54: house, he was used to be free from them there: his civility, therefore,
LINE 55: was most prompt in inviting Mr. Collins to join his daughters in their
LINE 56: walk; and Mr. Collins, being in fact much better fitted for a walker
LINE 57: than a reader, was extremely well pleased to close his large book, and
LINE 58: go.
LINE 59: In pompous nothings on his side, and civil assents on that of his
LINE 60: cousins, their time passed till they entered Meryton. The attention of
LINE 61: the younger ones was then no longer to be gained by _him_. Their eyes
LINE 62: were immediately wandering up the street in quest of the officers, and
LINE 63: nothing less than a very smart bonnet, indeed, or a really new muslin in
LINE 64: a shop window, could recall them.
LINE 65: But the attention of every lady was soon caught by a young man, whom
LINE 66: they had never seen before, of most gentlemanlike appearance, walking
LINE 67: with an officer on the other side of the way. The officer was the very
LINE 68: Mr. Denny concerning whose return from London Lydia came to inquire, and
LINE 69: he bowed as they passed. All were struck with the stranger's air, all
LINE 70: wondered who he could be; and Kitty and Lydia, determined if possible
LINE 71: to find out, led the way across the street, under pretence of wanting
LINE 72: something in an opposite shop, and fortunately had just gained the
LINE 73: pavement, when the two gentlemen, turning back, had reached the same
LINE 74: spot. Mr. Denny addressed them directly, and entreated permission to
LINE 75: introduce his friend, Mr. Wickham, who had returned with him the day
LINE 76: before from town, and, he was happy to say, had accepted a commission in
LINE 77: their corps. This was exactly as it should be; for the young man wanted
LINE 78: only regimentals to make him completely charming. His appearance was
LINE 79: greatly in his favour: he had all the best parts of beauty, a fine
LINE 80: countenance, a good figure, and very pleasing address. The introduction
LINE 81: was followed up on his side by a happy readiness of conversation--a
LINE 82: readiness at the same time perfectly correct and unassuming; and the
LINE 83: whole party were still standing and talking together very agreeably,
LINE 84: when the sound of horses drew their notice, and Darcy and Bingley were
LINE 85: seen riding down the street. On distinguishing the ladies of the group
LINE 86: the two gentlemen came directly towards them, and began the usual
LINE 87: civilities. Bingley was the principal spokesman, and Miss Bennet the
LINE 88: principal object. He was then, he said, on his way to Longbourn on
LINE 89: purpose to inquire after her. Mr. Darcy corroborated it with a bow, and
LINE 90: was beginning to determine not to fix his eyes on Elizabeth, when they
LINE 91: were suddenly arrested by the sight of the stranger; and Elizabeth
LINE 92: happening to see the countenance of both as they looked at each other,
LINE 93: was all astonishment at the effect of the meeting. Both changed colour,
LINE 94: one looked white, the other red. Mr. Wickham, after a few moments,
LINE 95: touched his hat--a salutation which Mr. Darcy just deigned to return.
LINE 96: What could be the meaning of it? It was impossible to imagine; it was
LINE 97: impossible not to long to know.
LINE 98: In another minute Mr. Bingley, but without seeming to have noticed what
LINE 99: passed, took leave and rode on with his friend.
LINE 100: Mr. Denny and Mr. Wickham walked with the young ladies to the door of
LINE 101: Mr. Philips's house, and then made their bows, in spite of Miss Lydia's
LINE 102: pressing entreaties that they would come in, and even in spite of Mrs.
LINE 103: Philips's throwing up the parlour window, and loudly seconding the
LINE 104: invitation.
LINE 105: Mrs. Philips was always glad to see her nieces; and the two eldest, from
LINE 106: their recent absence, were particularly welcome; and she was eagerly
LINE 107: expressing her surprise at their sudden return home, which, as their own
LINE 108: carriage had not fetched them, she should have known nothing about, if
LINE 109: she had not happened to see Mr. Jones's shopboy in the street, who had
LINE 110: told her that they were not to send any more draughts to Netherfield,
LINE 111: because the Miss Bennets were come away, when her civility was claimed
LINE 112: towards Mr. Collins by Jane's introduction of him. She received him with
LINE 113: her very best politeness, which he returned with as much more,
LINE 114: apologizing for his intrusion, without any previous acquaintance with
LINE 115: her, which he could not help flattering himself, however, might be
LINE 116: justified by his relationship to the young ladies who introduced him to
LINE 117: her notice. Mrs. Philips was quite awed by such an excess of good
LINE 118: breeding; but her contemplation of one stranger was soon put an end to
LINE 119: by exclamations and inquiries about the other, of whom, however, she
LINE 120: could only tell her nieces what they already knew, that Mr. Denny had
LINE 121: brought him from London, and that he was to have a lieutenant's
LINE 122: commission in the ----shire. She had been watching him the last hour,
LINE 123: she said, as he walked up and down the street,--and had Mr. Wickham
LINE 124: appeared, Kitty and Lydia would certainly have continued the occupation;
LINE 125: but unluckily no one passed the windows now except a few of the
LINE 126: officers, who, in comparison with the stranger, were become "stupid,
LINE 127: disagreeable fellows." Some of them were to dine with the Philipses the
LINE 128: next day, and their aunt promised to make her husband call on Mr.
LINE 129: Wickham, and give him an invitation also, if the family from Longbourn
LINE 130: would come in the evening. This was agreed to; and Mrs. Philips
LINE 131: protested that they would have a nice comfortable noisy game of lottery
LINE 132: tickets, and a little bit of hot supper afterwards. The prospect of such
LINE 133: delights was very cheering, and they parted in mutual good spirits. Mr.
LINE 134: Collins repeated his apologies in quitting the room, and was assured,
LINE 135: with unwearying civility, that they were perfectly needless.
LINE 136: As they walked home, Elizabeth related to Jane what she had seen pass
LINE 137: between the two gentlemen; but though Jane would have defended either or
LINE 138: both, had they appeared to be wrong, she could no more explain such
LINE 139: behaviour than her sister.
LINE 140: Mr. Collins on his return highly gratified Mrs. Bennet by admiring Mrs.
LINE 141: Philips's manners and politeness. He protested that, except Lady
LINE 142: Catherine and her daughter, he had never seen a more elegant woman; for
LINE 143: she had not only received him with the utmost civility, but had even
LINE 144: pointedly included him in her invitation for the next evening, although
LINE 145: utterly unknown to her before. Something, he supposed, might be
LINE 146: attributed to his connection with them, but yet he had never met with so
LINE 147: much attention in the whole course of his life.
LINE 148: [Illustration]