LINE 1: [Illustration]
LINE 2: After a week spent in professions of love and schemes of felicity, Mr.
LINE 3: Collins was called from his amiable Charlotte by the arrival of
LINE 4: Saturday. The pain of separation, however, might be alleviated on his
LINE 5: side by preparations for the reception of his bride, as he had reason to
LINE 6: hope, that shortly after his next return into Hertfordshire, the day
LINE 7: would be fixed that was to make him the happiest of men. He took leave
LINE 8: of his relations at Longbourn with as much solemnity as before; wished
LINE 9: his fair cousins health and happiness again, and promised their father
LINE 10: another letter of thanks.
LINE 11: On the following Monday, Mrs. Bennet had the pleasure of receiving her
LINE 12: brother and his wife, who came, as usual, to spend the Christmas at
LINE 13: Longbourn. Mr. Gardiner was a sensible, gentlemanlike man, greatly
LINE 14: superior to his sister, as well by nature as education. The Netherfield
LINE 15: ladies would have had difficulty in believing that a man who lived by
LINE 16: trade, and within view of his own warehouses, could have been so
LINE 17: well-bred and agreeable. Mrs. Gardiner, who was several years younger
LINE 18: than Mrs. Bennet and Mrs. Philips, was an amiable, intelligent, elegant
LINE 19: woman, and a great favourite with her Longbourn nieces. Between the two
LINE 20: eldest and herself especially, there subsisted a very particular regard.
LINE 21: They had frequently been staying with her in town.
LINE 22: The first part of Mrs. Gardiner's business, on her arrival, was to
LINE 23: distribute her presents and describe the newest fashions. When this was
LINE 24: done, she had a less active part to play. It became her turn to listen.
LINE 25: Mrs. Bennet had many grievances to relate, and much to complain of. They
LINE 26: had all been very ill-used since she last saw her sister. Two of her
LINE 27: girls had been on the point of marriage, and after all there was nothing
LINE 28: in it.
LINE 29: "I do not blame Jane," she continued, "for Jane would have got Mr.
LINE 30: Bingley if she could. But, Lizzy! Oh, sister! it is very hard to think
LINE 31: that she might have been Mr. Collins's wife by this time, had not it
LINE 32: been for her own perverseness. He made her an offer in this very room,
LINE 33: and she refused him. The consequence of it is, that Lady Lucas will have
LINE 34: a daughter married before I have, and that Longbourn estate is just as
LINE 35: much entailed as ever. The Lucases are very artful people, indeed,
LINE 36: sister. They are all for what they can get. I am sorry to say it of
LINE 37: them, but so it is. It makes me very nervous and poorly, to be thwarted
LINE 38: so in my own family, and to have neighbours who think of themselves
LINE 39: before anybody else. However, your coming just at this time is the
LINE 40: greatest of comforts, and I am very glad to hear what you tell us of
LINE 41: long sleeves."
LINE 42: Mrs. Gardiner, to whom the chief of this news had been given before, in
LINE 43: the course of Jane and Elizabeth's correspondence with her, made her
LINE 44: sister a slight answer, and, in compassion to her nieces, turned the
LINE 45: conversation.
LINE 46: When alone with Elizabeth afterwards, she spoke more on the subject.
LINE 47: "It seems likely to have been a desirable match for Jane," said she. "I
LINE 48: am sorry it went off. But these things happen so often! A young man,
LINE 49: such as you describe Mr. Bingley, so easily falls in love with a pretty
LINE 50: girl for a few weeks, and, when accident separates them, so easily
LINE 51: forgets her, that these sort of inconstancies are very frequent."
LINE 52: [Illustration:
LINE 53: "Offended two or three young ladies"
LINE 54: [_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]
LINE 55: "An excellent consolation in its way," said Elizabeth; "but it will not
LINE 56: do for _us_. We do not suffer by accident. It does not often happen
LINE 57: that the interference of friends will persuade a young man of
LINE 58: independent fortune to think no more of a girl whom he was violently in
LINE 59: love with only a few days before."
LINE 60: "But that expression of 'violently in love' is so hackneyed, so
LINE 61: doubtful, so indefinite, that it gives me very little idea. It is as
LINE 62: often applied to feelings which arise only from a half hour's
LINE 63: acquaintance, as to a real, strong attachment. Pray, how _violent was_
LINE 64: Mr. Bingley's love?"
LINE 65: "I never saw a more promising inclination; he was growing quite
LINE 66: inattentive to other people, and wholly engrossed by her. Every time
LINE 67: they met, it was more decided and remarkable. At his own ball he
LINE 68: offended two or three young ladies by not asking them to dance; and I
LINE 69: spoke to him twice myself without receiving an answer. Could there be
LINE 70: finer symptoms? Is not general incivility the very essence of love?"
LINE 71: "Oh, yes! of that kind of love which I suppose him to have felt. Poor
LINE 72: Jane! I am sorry for her, because, with her disposition, she may not get
LINE 73: over it immediately. It had better have happened to _you_, Lizzy; you
LINE 74: would have laughed yourself out of it sooner. But do you think she would
LINE 75: be prevailed on to go back with us? Change of scene might be of
LINE 76: service--and perhaps a little relief from home may be as useful as
LINE 77: anything."
LINE 78: Elizabeth was exceedingly pleased with this proposal, and felt persuaded
LINE 79: of her sister's ready acquiescence.
LINE 80: "I hope," added Mrs. Gardiner, "that no consideration with regard to
LINE 81: this young man will influence her. We live in so different a part of
LINE 82: town, all our connections are so different, and, as you well know, we go
LINE 83: out so little, that it is very improbable they should meet at all,
LINE 84: unless he really comes to see her."
LINE 85: "And _that_ is quite impossible; for he is now in the custody of his
LINE 86: friend, and Mr. Darcy would no more suffer him to call on Jane in such a
LINE 87: part of London! My dear aunt, how could you think of it? Mr. Darcy may,
LINE 88: perhaps, have _heard_ of such a place as Gracechurch Street, but he
LINE 89: would hardly think a month's ablution enough to cleanse him from its
LINE 90: impurities, were he once to enter it; and, depend upon it, Mr. Bingley
LINE 91: never stirs without him."
LINE 92: "So much the better. I hope they will not meet at all. But does not Jane
LINE 93: correspond with his sister? _She_ will not be able to help calling."
LINE 94: "She will drop the acquaintance entirely."
LINE 95: But, in spite of the certainty in which Elizabeth affected to place this
LINE 96: point, as well as the still more interesting one of Bingley's being
LINE 97: withheld from seeing Jane, she felt a solicitude on the subject which
LINE 98: convinced her, on examination, that she did not consider it entirely
LINE 99: hopeless. It was possible, and sometimes she thought it probable, that
LINE 100: his affection might be re-animated, and the influence of his friends
LINE 101: successfully combated by the more natural influence of Jane's
LINE 102: attractions.
LINE 103: Miss Bennet accepted her aunt's invitation with pleasure; and the
LINE 104: Bingleys were no otherwise in her thoughts at the same time than as she
LINE 105: hoped, by Caroline's not living in the same house with her brother, she
LINE 106: might occasionally spend a morning with her, without any danger of
LINE 107: seeing him.
LINE 108: The Gardiners stayed a week at Longbourn; and what with the Philipses,
LINE 109: the Lucases, and the officers, there was not a day without its
LINE 110: engagement. Mrs. Bennet had so carefully provided for the entertainment
LINE 111: of her brother and sister, that they did not once sit down to a family
LINE 112: dinner. When the engagement was for home, some of the officers always
LINE 113: made part of it, of which officers Mr. Wickham was sure to be one; and
LINE 114: on these occasions Mrs. Gardiner, rendered suspicious by Elizabeth's
LINE 115: warm commendation of him, narrowly observed them both. Without supposing
LINE 116: them, from what she saw, to be very seriously in love, their preference
LINE 117: of each other was plain enough to make her a little uneasy; and she
LINE 118: resolved to speak to Elizabeth on the subject before she left
LINE 119: Hertfordshire, and represent to her the imprudence of encouraging such
LINE 120: an attachment.
LINE 121: To Mrs. Gardiner, Wickham had one means of affording pleasure,
LINE 122: unconnected with his general powers. About ten or a dozen years ago,
LINE 123: before her marriage, she had spent a considerable time in that very part
LINE 124: of Derbyshire to which he belonged. They had, therefore, many
LINE 125: acquaintance in common; and, though Wickham had been little there since
LINE 126: the death of Darcy's father, five years before, it was yet in his power
LINE 127: to give her fresher intelligence of her former friends than she had been
LINE 128: in the way of procuring.
LINE 129: Mrs. Gardiner had seen Pemberley, and known the late Mr. Darcy by
LINE 130: character perfectly well. Here, consequently, was an inexhaustible
LINE 131: subject of discourse. In comparing her recollection of Pemberley with
LINE 132: the minute description which Wickham could give, and in bestowing her
LINE 133: tribute of praise on the character of its late possessor, she was
LINE 134: delighting both him and herself. On being made acquainted with the
LINE 135: present Mr. Darcy's treatment of him, she tried to remember something of
LINE 136: that gentleman's reputed disposition, when quite a lad, which might
LINE 137: agree with it; and was confident, at last, that she recollected having
LINE 138: heard Mr. Fitzwilliam Darcy formerly spoken of as a very proud,
LINE 139: ill-natured boy.
LINE 140: [Illustration:
LINE 141: "Will you come and see me?"
LINE 142: ]