LINE 1: [Illustration]
LINE 2: Sir William stayed only a week at Hunsford; but his visit was long
LINE 3: enough to convince him of his daughter's being most comfortably settled,
LINE 4: and of her possessing such a husband and such a neighbour as were not
LINE 5: often met with. While Sir William was with them, Mr. Collins devoted his
LINE 6: mornings to driving him out in his gig, and showing him the country: but
LINE 7: when he went away, the whole family returned to their usual employments,
LINE 8: and Elizabeth was thankful to find that they did not see more of her
LINE 9: cousin by the alteration; for the chief of the time between breakfast
LINE 10: and dinner was now passed by him either at work in the garden, or in
LINE 11: reading and writing, and looking out of window in his own book room,
LINE 12: which fronted the road. The room in which the ladies sat was backwards.
LINE 13: Elizabeth at first had rather wondered that Charlotte should not prefer
LINE 14: the dining parlour for common use; it was a better sized room, and had a
LINE 15: pleasanter aspect: but she soon saw that her friend had an excellent
LINE 16: reason for what she did, for Mr. Collins would undoubtedly have been
LINE 17: much less in his own apartment had they sat in one equally lively; and
LINE 18: she gave Charlotte credit for the arrangement.
LINE 19: From the drawing-room they could distinguish nothing in the lane, and
LINE 20: were indebted to Mr. Collins for the knowledge of what carriages went
LINE 21: along, and how often especially Miss De Bourgh drove by in her phaeton,
LINE 22: which he never failed coming to inform them of, though it happened
LINE 23: almost every day. She not unfrequently stopped at the Parsonage, and had
LINE 24: a few minutes' conversation with Charlotte, but was scarcely ever
LINE 25: prevailed on to get out.
LINE 26: Very few days passed in which Mr. Collins did not walk to Rosings, and
LINE 27: not many in which his wife did not think it necessary to go likewise;
LINE 28: and till Elizabeth recollected that there might be other family livings
LINE 29: to be disposed of, she could not understand the sacrifice of so many
LINE 30: hours. Now and then they were honoured with a call from her Ladyship,
LINE 31: and nothing escaped her observation that was passing in the room during
LINE 32: these visits. She examined into their employments, looked at their work,
LINE 33: and advised them to do it differently; found fault with the arrangement
LINE 34: of the furniture, or detected the housemaid in negligence; and if she
LINE 35: accepted any refreshment, seemed to do it only for the sake of finding
LINE 36: out that Mrs. Collins's joints of meat were too large for her family.
LINE 37: Elizabeth soon perceived, that though this great lady was not in the
LINE 38: commission of the peace for the county, she was a most active magistrate
LINE 39: in her own parish, the minutest concerns of which were carried to her by
LINE 40: Mr. Collins; and whenever any of the cottagers were disposed to be
LINE 41: quarrelsome, discontented, or too poor, she sallied forth into the
LINE 42: village to settle their differences, silence their complaints, and scold
LINE 43: them into harmony and plenty.
LINE 44: [Illustration:
LINE 45: "he never failed to inform them"
LINE 46: ]
LINE 47: The entertainment of dining at Rosings was repeated about twice a week;
LINE 48: and, allowing for the loss of Sir William, and there being only one
LINE 49: card-table in the evening, every such entertainment was the counterpart
LINE 50: of the first. Their other engagements were few, as the style of living
LINE 51: of the neighbourhood in general was beyond the Collinses' reach. This,
LINE 52: however, was no evil to Elizabeth, and upon the whole she spent her time
LINE 53: comfortably enough: there were half hours of pleasant conversation with
LINE 54: Charlotte, and the weather was so fine for the time of year, that she
LINE 55: had often great enjoyment out of doors. Her favourite walk, and where
LINE 56: she frequently went while the others were calling on Lady Catherine, was
LINE 57: along the open grove which edged that side of the park, where there was
LINE 58: a nice sheltered path, which no one seemed to value but herself, and
LINE 59: where she felt beyond the reach of Lady Catherine's curiosity.
LINE 60: In this quiet way the first fortnight of her visit soon passed away.
LINE 61: Easter was approaching, and the week preceding it was to bring an
LINE 62: addition to the family at Rosings, which in so small a circle must be
LINE 63: important. Elizabeth had heard, soon after her arrival, that Mr. Darcy
LINE 64: was expected there in the course of a few weeks; and though there were
LINE 65: not many of her acquaintance whom she did not prefer, his coming would
LINE 66: furnish one comparatively new to look at in their Rosings parties, and
LINE 67: she might be amused in seeing how hopeless Miss Bingley's designs on him
LINE 68: were, by his behaviour to his cousin, for whom he was evidently destined
LINE 69: by Lady Catherine, who talked of his coming with the greatest
LINE 70: satisfaction, spoke of him in terms of the highest admiration, and
LINE 71: seemed almost angry to find that he had already been frequently seen by
LINE 72: Miss Lucas and herself.
LINE 73: His arrival was soon known at the Parsonage; for Mr. Collins was walking
LINE 74: the whole morning within view of the lodges opening into Hunsford Lane,
LINE 75: in order to have
LINE 76: [Illustration:
LINE 77: "The gentlemen accompanied him."
LINE 78: [_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]
LINE 79: the earliest assurance of it; and, after making his bow as the carriage
LINE 80: turned into the park, hurried home with the great intelligence. On the
LINE 81: following morning he hastened to Rosings to pay his respects. There were
LINE 82: two nephews of Lady Catherine to require them, for Mr. Darcy had brought
LINE 83: with him a Colonel Fitzwilliam, the younger son of his uncle, Lord ----;
LINE 84: and, to the great surprise of all the party, when Mr. Collins returned,
LINE 85: the gentlemen accompanied him. Charlotte had seen them from her
LINE 86: husband's room, crossing the road, and immediately running into the
LINE 87: other, told the girls what an honour they might expect, adding,--
LINE 88: "I may thank you, Eliza, for this piece of civility. Mr. Darcy would
LINE 89: never have come so soon to wait upon me."
LINE 90: Elizabeth had scarcely time to disclaim all right to the compliment
LINE 91: before their approach was announced by the door-bell, and shortly
LINE 92: afterwards the three gentlemen entered the room. Colonel Fitzwilliam,
LINE 93: who led the way, was about thirty, not handsome, but in person and
LINE 94: address most truly the gentleman. Mr. Darcy looked just as he had been
LINE 95: used to look in Hertfordshire, paid his compliments, with his usual
LINE 96: reserve, to Mrs. Collins; and whatever might be his feelings towards her
LINE 97: friend, met her with every appearance of composure. Elizabeth merely
LINE 98: courtesied to him, without saying a word.
LINE 99: Colonel Fitzwilliam entered into conversation directly, with the
LINE 100: readiness and ease of a well-bred man, and talked very pleasantly; but
LINE 101: his cousin, after having addressed a slight observation on the house and
LINE 102: garden to Mrs. Collins, sat for some time without speaking to anybody.
LINE 103: At length, however, his civility was so far awakened as to inquire of
LINE 104: Elizabeth after the health of her family. She answered him in the usual
LINE 105: way; and, after a moment's pause, added,--
LINE 106: "My eldest sister has been in town these three months. Have you never
LINE 107: happened to see her there?"
LINE 108: She was perfectly sensible that he never had: but she wished to see
LINE 109: whether he would betray any consciousness of what had passed between the
LINE 110: Bingleys and Jane; and she thought he looked a little confused as he
LINE 111: answered that he had never been so fortunate as to meet Miss Bennet. The
LINE 112: subject was pursued no further, and the gentlemen soon afterwards went
LINE 113: away.
LINE 114: [Illustration:
LINE 115: "At Church"
LINE 116: ]