LINE 1: It is a truth universally acknowledged, that a single man in possession
LINE 2: of a good fortune must be in want of a wife.
LINE 3: However little known the feelings or views of such a man may be on his
LINE 4: first entering a neighbourhood, this truth is so well fixed in the minds
LINE 5: of the surrounding families, that he is considered as the rightful
LINE 6: property of some one or other of their daughters.
LINE 7: "My dear Mr. Bennet," said his lady to him one day, "have you heard that
LINE 8: Netherfield Park is let at last?"
LINE 9: Mr. Bennet replied that he had not.
LINE 10: "But it is," returned she; "for Mrs. Long has just been here, and she
LINE 11: told me all about it."
LINE 12: Mr. Bennet made no answer.
LINE 13: "Do not you want to know who has taken it?" cried his wife, impatiently.
LINE 14: "_You_ want to tell me, and I have no objection to hearing it."
LINE 15: [Illustration:
LINE 16: "He came down to see the place"
LINE 17: [_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]
LINE 18: This was invitation enough.
LINE 19: "Why, my dear, you must know, Mrs. Long says that Netherfield is taken
LINE 20: by a young man of large fortune from the north of England; that he came
LINE 21: down on Monday in a chaise and four to see the place, and was so much
LINE 22: delighted with it that he agreed with Mr. Morris immediately; that he is
LINE 23: to take possession before Michaelmas, and some of his servants are to be
LINE 24: in the house by the end of next week."
LINE 25: "What is his name?"
LINE 26: "Bingley."
LINE 27: "Is he married or single?"
LINE 28: "Oh, single, my dear, to be sure! A single man of large fortune; four or
LINE 29: five thousand a year. What a fine thing for our girls!"
LINE 30: "How so? how can it affect them?"
LINE 31: "My dear Mr. Bennet," replied his wife, "how can you be so tiresome? You
LINE 32: must know that I am thinking of his marrying one of them."
LINE 33: "Is that his design in settling here?"
LINE 34: "Design? Nonsense, how can you talk so! But it is very likely that he
LINE 35: _may_ fall in love with one of them, and therefore you must visit him as
LINE 36: soon as he comes."
LINE 37: "I see no occasion for that. You and the girls may go--or you may send
LINE 38: them by themselves, which perhaps will be still better; for as you are
LINE 39: as handsome as any of them, Mr. Bingley might like you the best of the
LINE 40: party."
LINE 41: "My dear, you flatter me. I certainly _have_ had my share of beauty, but
LINE 42: I do not pretend to be anything extraordinary now. When a woman has five
LINE 43: grown-up daughters, she ought to give over thinking of her own beauty."
LINE 44: "In such cases, a woman has not often much beauty to think of."
LINE 45: "But, my dear, you must indeed go and see Mr. Bingley when he comes into
LINE 46: the neighbourhood."
LINE 47: "It is more than I engage for, I assure you."
LINE 48: "But consider your daughters. Only think what an establishment it would
LINE 49: be for one of them. Sir William and Lady Lucas are determined to go,
LINE 50: merely on that account; for in general, you know, they visit no new
LINE 51: comers. Indeed you must go, for it will be impossible for _us_ to visit
LINE 52: him, if you do not."
LINE 53: "You are over scrupulous, surely. I dare say Mr. Bingley will be very
LINE 54: glad to see you; and I will send a few lines by you to assure him of my
LINE 55: hearty consent to his marrying whichever he chooses of the girls--though
LINE 56: I must throw in a good word for my little Lizzy."
LINE 57: "I desire you will do no such thing. Lizzy is not a bit better than the
LINE 58: others: and I am sure she is not half so handsome as Jane, nor half so
LINE 59: good-humoured as Lydia. But you are always giving _her_ the preference."
LINE 60: "They have none of them much to recommend them," replied he: "they are
LINE 61: all silly and ignorant like other girls; but Lizzy has something more of
LINE 62: quickness than her sisters."
LINE 63: "Mr. Bennet, how can you abuse your own children in such a way? You take
LINE 64: delight in vexing me. You have no compassion on my poor nerves."
LINE 65: "You mistake me, my dear. I have a high respect for your nerves. They
LINE 66: are my old friends. I have heard you mention them with consideration
LINE 67: these twenty years at least."
LINE 68: "Ah, you do not know what I suffer."
LINE 69: "But I hope you will get over it, and live to see many young men of four
LINE 70: thousand a year come into the neighbourhood."
LINE 71: "It will be no use to us, if twenty such should come, since you will not
LINE 72: visit them."
LINE 73: "Depend upon it, my dear, that when there are twenty, I will visit them
LINE 74: all."
LINE 75: Mr. Bennet was so odd a mixture of quick parts, sarcastic humour,
LINE 76: reserve, and caprice, that the experience of three-and-twenty years had
LINE 77: been insufficient to make his wife understand his character. _Her_ mind
LINE 78: was less difficult to develope. She was a woman of mean understanding,
LINE 79: little information, and uncertain temper. When she was discontented, she
LINE 80: fancied herself nervous. The business of her life was to get her
LINE 81: daughters married: its solace was visiting and news.
LINE 82: [Illustration: M^{r.} & M^{rs.} Bennet
LINE 83: [_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]
LINE 84: [Illustration:
LINE 85: "I hope Mr. Bingley will like it"
LINE 86: [_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]