LINE 1: [Illustration]
LINE 2: With no greater events than these in the Longbourn family, and otherwise
LINE 3: diversified by little beyond the walks to Meryton, sometimes dirty and
LINE 4: sometimes cold, did January and February pass away. March was to take
LINE 5: Elizabeth to Hunsford. She had not at first thought very seriously of
LINE 6: going thither; but Charlotte, she soon found, was depending on the
LINE 7: plan, and she gradually learned to consider it herself with greater
LINE 8: pleasure as well as greater certainty. Absence had increased her desire
LINE 9: of seeing Charlotte again, and weakened her disgust of Mr. Collins.
LINE 10: There was novelty in the scheme; and as, with such a mother and such
LINE 11: uncompanionable sisters, home could not be faultless, a little change
LINE 12: was not unwelcome for its own sake. The journey would, moreover, give
LINE 13: her a peep at Jane; and, in short, as the time drew near, she would have
LINE 14: been very sorry for any delay. Everything, however, went on smoothly,
LINE 15: and was finally settled according to Charlotte's first sketch. She was
LINE 16: to accompany Sir William and his second daughter. The improvement of
LINE 17: spending a night in London was added in time, and the plan became as
LINE 18: perfect as plan could be.
LINE 19: The only pain was in leaving her father, who would certainly miss her,
LINE 20: and who, when it came to the point, so little liked her going, that he
LINE 21: told her to write to him, and almost promised to answer her letter.
LINE 22: The farewell between herself and Mr. Wickham was perfectly friendly; on
LINE 23: his side even more. His present pursuit could not make him forget that
LINE 24: Elizabeth had been the first to excite and to deserve his attention, the
LINE 25: first to listen and to pity, the first to be admired; and in his manner
LINE 26: of bidding her adieu, wishing her every enjoyment, reminding her of what
LINE 27: she was to expect in Lady Catherine de Bourgh, and trusting their
LINE 28: opinion of her--their opinion of everybody--would always coincide, there
LINE 29: was a solicitude, an interest, which she felt must ever attach her to
LINE 30: him with a most sincere regard; and she parted from him convinced, that,
LINE 31: whether married or single, he must always be her model of the amiable
LINE 32: and pleasing.
LINE 33: Her fellow-travellers the next day were not of a kind to make her think
LINE 34: him less agreeable. Sir William Lucas, and his daughter Maria, a
LINE 35: good-humoured girl, but as empty-headed as himself, had nothing to say
LINE 36: that could be worth hearing, and were listened to with about as much
LINE 37: delight as the rattle of the chaise. Elizabeth loved absurdities, but
LINE 38: she had known Sir William's too long. He could tell her nothing new of
LINE 39: the wonders of his presentation and knighthood; and his civilities were
LINE 40: worn out, like his information.
LINE 41: It was a journey of only twenty-four miles, and they began it so early
LINE 42: as to be in Gracechurch Street by noon. As they drove to Mr. Gardiner's
LINE 43: door, Jane was at a drawing-room window watching their arrival: when
LINE 44: they entered the passage, she was there to welcome them, and Elizabeth,
LINE 45: looking earnestly in her face, was pleased to see it healthful and
LINE 46: lovely as ever. On the stairs were a troop of little boys and girls,
LINE 47: whose eagerness for their cousin's appearance would not allow them to
LINE 48: wait in the drawing-room, and whose shyness, as they had not seen her
LINE 49: for a twelvemonth, prevented their coming lower. All was joy and
LINE 50: kindness. The day passed most pleasantly away; the morning in bustle and
LINE 51: shopping, and the evening at one of the theatres.
LINE 52: Elizabeth then contrived to sit by her aunt. Their first subject was her
LINE 53: sister; and she was more grieved than astonished to hear, in reply to
LINE 54: her minute inquiries, that though Jane always struggled to support her
LINE 55: spirits, there were periods of dejection. It was reasonable, however, to
LINE 56: hope that they would not continue long. Mrs. Gardiner gave her the
LINE 57: particulars also of Miss Bingley's visit in Gracechurch Street, and
LINE 58: repeated conversations occurring at different times between Jane and
LINE 59: herself, which proved that the former had, from her heart, given up the
LINE 60: acquaintance.
LINE 61: Mrs. Gardiner then rallied her niece on Wickham's desertion, and
LINE 62: complimented her on bearing it so well.
LINE 63: "But, my dear Elizabeth," she added, "what sort of girl is Miss King? I
LINE 64: should be sorry to think our friend mercenary."
LINE 65: "Pray, my dear aunt, what is the difference in matrimonial affairs,
LINE 66: between the mercenary and the prudent motive? Where does discretion end,
LINE 67: and avarice begin? Last Christmas you were afraid of his marrying me,
LINE 68: because it would be imprudent; and now, because he is trying to get a
LINE 69: girl with only ten thousand pounds, you want to find out that he is
LINE 70: mercenary."
LINE 71: "If you will only tell me what sort of girl Miss King is, I shall know
LINE 72: what to think."
LINE 73: "She is a very good kind of girl, I believe. I know no harm of her."
LINE 74: "But he paid her not the smallest attention till her grandfather's death
LINE 75: made her mistress of this fortune?"
LINE 76: "No--why should he? If it were not allowable for him to gain _my_
LINE 77: affections, because I had no money, what occasion could there be for
LINE 78: making love to a girl whom he did not care about, and who was equally
LINE 79: poor?"
LINE 80: "But there seems indelicacy in directing his attentions towards her so
LINE 81: soon after this event."
LINE 82: "A man in distressed circumstances has not time for all those elegant
LINE 83: decorums which other people may observe. If _she_ does not object to it,
LINE 84: why should _we_?"
LINE 85: "_Her_ not objecting does not justify _him_. It only shows her being
LINE 86: deficient in something herself--sense or feeling."
LINE 87: "Well," cried Elizabeth, "have it as you choose. _He_ shall be
LINE 88: mercenary, and _she_ shall be foolish."
LINE 89: "No, Lizzy, that is what I do _not_ choose. I should be sorry, you know,
LINE 90: to think ill of a young man who has lived so long in Derbyshire."
LINE 91: "Oh, if that is all, I have a very poor opinion of young men who live in
LINE 92: Derbyshire; and their intimate friends who live in Hertfordshire are not
LINE 93: much better. I am sick of them all. Thank heaven! I am going to-morrow
LINE 94: where I shall find a man who has not one agreeable quality, who has
LINE 95: neither manners nor sense to recommend him. Stupid men are the only ones
LINE 96: worth knowing, after all."
LINE 97: "Take care, Lizzy; that speech savours strongly of disappointment."
LINE 98: Before they were separated by the conclusion of the play, she had the
LINE 99: unexpected happiness of an invitation to accompany her uncle and aunt in
LINE 100: a tour of pleasure which they proposed taking in the summer.
LINE 101: "We have not quite determined how far it shall carry us," said Mrs.
LINE 102: Gardiner; "but perhaps, to the Lakes."
LINE 103: No scheme could have been more agreeable to Elizabeth, and her
LINE 104: acceptance of the invitation was most ready and grateful. "My dear, dear
LINE 105: aunt," she rapturously cried, "what delight! what felicity! You give me
LINE 106: fresh life and vigour. Adieu to disappointment and spleen. What are men
LINE 107: to rocks and mountains? Oh, what hours of transport we shall spend! And
LINE 108: when we _do_ return, it shall not be like other travellers, without
LINE 109: being able to give one accurate idea of anything. We _will_ know where
LINE 110: we have gone--we _will_ recollect what we have seen. Lakes, mountains,
LINE 111: and rivers, shall not be jumbled together in our imaginations; nor, when
LINE 112: we attempt to describe any particular scene, will we begin quarrelling
LINE 113: about its relative situation. Let _our_ first effusions be less
LINE 114: insupportable than those of the generality of travellers."
LINE 115: [Illustration:
LINE 116: "At the door"
LINE 117: ]