LINE 1: [Illustration]
LINE 2: The Bennets were engaged to dine with the Lucases; and again, during the
LINE 3: chief of the day, was Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to Mr. Collins.
LINE 4: Elizabeth took an opportunity of thanking her. "It keeps him in good
LINE 5: humour," said she, "and I am more obliged to you than I can express."
LINE 6: Charlotte assured her friend of her satisfaction in being useful, and
LINE 7: that it amply repaid her for the little sacrifice of her time. This was
LINE 8: very amiable; but Charlotte's kindness extended farther than Elizabeth
LINE 9: had any conception of:--its object was nothing less than to secure her
LINE 10: from any return of Mr. Collins's addresses, by engaging them towards
LINE 11: herself. Such was Miss Lucas's scheme; and appearances were so
LINE 12: favourable, that when they parted at night, she would have felt almost
LINE 13: sure of success if he had not been to leave Hertfordshire so very soon.
LINE 14: But here she did injustice to the fire and independence of his
LINE 15: character; for it led him to escape out of Longbourn House the next
LINE 16: morning with admirable slyness, and hasten to Lucas Lodge to throw
LINE 17: himself at her feet. He was anxious to avoid the notice of his cousins,
LINE 18: from a conviction that, if they saw him depart, they could not fail to
LINE 19: conjecture his design, and he was not willing to have the attempt known
LINE 20: till its success could be known likewise; for, though feeling almost
LINE 21: secure, and with reason, for Charlotte had been tolerably encouraging,
LINE 22: he was comparatively diffident since the adventure of Wednesday. His
LINE 23: reception, however, was of the most flattering kind. Miss Lucas
LINE 24: perceived him from an upper window as he walked towards the house, and
LINE 25: instantly set out to meet him accidentally in the lane. But little had
LINE 26: she dared to hope that so much love and eloquence awaited her there.
LINE 27: In as short a time as Mr. Collins's long speeches would allow,
LINE 28: everything was settled between them to the satisfaction of both; and as
LINE 29: they entered the house, he earnestly entreated her to name the day that
LINE 30: was to make him the happiest of men; and though such a solicitation must
LINE 31: be waived for the present, the lady felt no inclination to trifle with
LINE 32: his happiness. The stupidity with which he was favoured by nature must
LINE 33: guard his courtship from any charm that could make a woman wish for its
LINE 34: continuance; and Miss Lucas, who accepted him solely from the pure and
LINE 35: disinterested desire of an establishment, cared not how soon that
LINE 36: establishment were gained.
LINE 37: Sir William and Lady Lucas were speedily applied to for their consent;
LINE 38: and it was bestowed with a most joyful alacrity. Mr. Collins's present
LINE 39: circumstances made it a most eligible match for their daughter, to whom
LINE 40: they could give little fortune; and his prospects of future wealth were
LINE 41: exceedingly fair. Lady Lucas began directly to calculate, with more
LINE 42: interest than the matter had ever
LINE 43: [Illustration:
LINE 44: "So much love and eloquence"
LINE 45: [_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]
LINE 46: excited before, how many years longer Mr. Bennet was likely to live; and
LINE 47: Sir William gave it as his decided opinion, that whenever Mr. Collins
LINE 48: should be in possession of the Longbourn estate, it would be highly
LINE 49: expedient that both he and his wife should make their appearance at St.
LINE 50: James's. The whole family in short were properly overjoyed on the
LINE 51: occasion. The younger girls formed hopes of _coming out_ a year or two
LINE 52: sooner than they might otherwise have done; and the boys were relieved
LINE 53: from their apprehension of Charlotte's dying an old maid. Charlotte
LINE 54: herself was tolerably composed. She had gained her point, and had time
LINE 55: to consider of it. Her reflections were in general satisfactory. Mr.
LINE 56: Collins, to be sure, was neither sensible nor agreeable: his society was
LINE 57: irksome, and his attachment to her must be imaginary. But still he would
LINE 58: be her husband. Without thinking highly either of men or of matrimony,
LINE 59: marriage had always been her object: it was the only honourable
LINE 60: provision for well-educated young women of small fortune, and, however
LINE 61: uncertain of giving happiness, must be their pleasantest preservative
LINE 62: from want. This preservative she had now obtained; and at the age of
LINE 63: twenty-seven, without having ever been handsome, she felt all the good
LINE 64: luck of it. The least agreeable circumstance in the business was the
LINE 65: surprise it must occasion to Elizabeth Bennet, whose friendship she
LINE 66: valued beyond that of any other person. Elizabeth would wonder, and
LINE 67: probably would blame her; and though her resolution was not to be
LINE 68: shaken, her feelings must be hurt by such a disapprobation. She resolved
LINE 69: to give her the information herself; and therefore charged Mr. Collins,
LINE 70: when he returned to Longbourn to dinner, to drop no hint of what had
LINE 71: passed before any of the family. A promise of secrecy was of course very
LINE 72: dutifully given, but it could not be kept without difficulty; for the
LINE 73: curiosity excited by his long absence burst forth in such very direct
LINE 74: questions on his return, as required some ingenuity to evade, and he was
LINE 75: at the same time exercising great self-denial, for he was longing to
LINE 76: publish his prosperous love.
LINE 77: As he was to begin his journey too early on the morrow to see any of
LINE 78: the family, the ceremony of leave-taking was performed when the ladies
LINE 79: moved for the night; and Mrs. Bennet, with great politeness and
LINE 80: cordiality, said how happy they should be to see him at Longbourn again,
LINE 81: whenever his other engagements might allow him to visit them.
LINE 82: "My dear madam," he replied, "this invitation is particularly
LINE 83: gratifying, because it is what I have been hoping to receive; and you
LINE 84: may be very certain that I shall avail myself of it as soon as
LINE 85: possible."
LINE 86: They were all astonished; and Mr. Bennet, who could by no means wish for
LINE 87: so speedy a return, immediately said,--
LINE 88: "But is there not danger of Lady Catherine's disapprobation here, my
LINE 89: good sir? You had better neglect your relations than run the risk of
LINE 90: offending your patroness."
LINE 91: "My dear sir," replied Mr. Collins, "I am particularly obliged to you
LINE 92: for this friendly caution, and you may depend upon my not taking so
LINE 93: material a step without her Ladyship's concurrence."
LINE 94: "You cannot be too much on your guard. Risk anything rather than her
LINE 95: displeasure; and if you find it likely to be raised by your coming to us
LINE 96: again, which I should think exceedingly probable, stay quietly at home,
LINE 97: and be satisfied that _we_ shall take no offence."
LINE 98: "Believe me, my dear sir, my gratitude is warmly excited by such
LINE 99: affectionate attention; and, depend upon it, you will speedily receive
LINE 100: from me a letter of thanks for this as well as for every other mark of
LINE 101: your regard during my stay in Hertfordshire. As for my fair cousins,
LINE 102: though my absence may not be long enough to render it necessary, I shall
LINE 103: now take the liberty of wishing them health and happiness, not excepting
LINE 104: my cousin Elizabeth."
LINE 105: With proper civilities, the ladies then withdrew; all of them equally
LINE 106: surprised to find that he meditated a quick return. Mrs. Bennet wished
LINE 107: to understand by it that he thought of paying his addresses to one of
LINE 108: her younger girls, and Mary might have been prevailed on to accept him.
LINE 109: She rated his abilities much higher than any of the others: there was a
LINE 110: solidity in his reflections which often struck her; and though by no
LINE 111: means so clever as herself, she thought that, if encouraged to read and
LINE 112: improve himself by such an example as hers, he might become a very
LINE 113: agreeable companion. But on the following morning every hope of this
LINE 114: kind was done away. Miss Lucas called soon after breakfast, and in a
LINE 115: private conference with Elizabeth related the event of the day before.
LINE 116: The possibility of Mr. Collins's fancying himself in love with her
LINE 117: friend had once occurred to Elizabeth within the last day or two: but
LINE 118: that Charlotte could encourage him seemed almost as far from possibility
LINE 119: as that she could encourage him herself; and her astonishment was
LINE 120: consequently so great as to overcome at first the bounds of decorum, and
LINE 121: she could not help crying out,--
LINE 122: "Engaged to Mr. Collins! my dear Charlotte, impossible!"
LINE 123: The steady countenance which Miss Lucas had commanded in telling her
LINE 124: story gave way to a momentary confusion here on receiving so direct a
LINE 125: reproach; though, as it was no more than she expected, she soon regained
LINE 126: her composure, and calmly replied,--
LINE 127: "Why should you be surprised, my dear Eliza? Do you think it incredible
LINE 128: that Mr. Collins should be able to procure any woman's good opinion,
LINE 129: because he was not so happy as to succeed with you?"
LINE 130: But Elizabeth had now recollected herself; and, making a strong effort
LINE 131: for it, was able to assure her, with tolerable firmness, that the
LINE 132: prospect of their relationship was highly grateful to her, and that she
LINE 133: wished her all imaginable happiness.
LINE 134: "I see what you are feeling," replied Charlotte; "you must be surprised,
LINE 135: very much surprised, so lately as Mr. Collins was wishing to marry you.
LINE 136: But when you have had time to think it all over, I hope you will be
LINE 137: satisfied with what I have done. I am not romantic, you know. I never
LINE 138: was. I ask only a comfortable home; and, considering Mr. Collins's
LINE 139: character, connections, and situation in life, I am convinced that my
LINE 140: chance of happiness with him is as fair as most people can boast on
LINE 141: entering the marriage state."
LINE 142: Elizabeth quietly answered "undoubtedly;" and, after an awkward pause,
LINE 143: they returned to the rest of the family. Charlotte did not stay much
LINE 144: longer; and Elizabeth was then left to reflect on what she had heard. It
LINE 145: was a long time before she became at all reconciled to the idea of so
LINE 146: unsuitable a match. The strangeness of Mr. Collins's making two offers
LINE 147: of marriage within three days was nothing in comparison of his being now
LINE 148: accepted. She had always felt that Charlotte's opinion of matrimony was
LINE 149: not exactly like her own; but she could not have supposed it possible
LINE 150: that, when called into action, she would have sacrificed every better
LINE 151: feeling to worldly advantage. Charlotte, the wife of Mr. Collins, was a
LINE 152: most humiliating picture! And to the pang of a friend disgracing
LINE 153: herself, and sunk in her esteem, was added the distressing conviction
LINE 154: that it was impossible for that friend to be tolerably happy in the lot
LINE 155: she had chosen.
LINE 156: [Illustration:
LINE 157: "Protested he must be entirely mistaken."
LINE 158: [_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]