LINE 1: [Illustration]
LINE 2: On Saturday morning Elizabeth and Mr. Collins met for breakfast a few
LINE 3: minutes before the others appeared; and he took the opportunity of
LINE 4: paying the parting civilities which he deemed indispensably necessary.
LINE 5: "I know not, Miss Elizabeth," said he, "whether Mrs. Collins has yet
LINE 6: expressed her sense of your kindness in coming to us; but I am very
LINE 7: certain you will not leave the house without receiving her thanks for
LINE 8: it. The favour of your company has been much felt, I assure you. We know
LINE 9: how little there is to tempt anyone to our humble abode. Our plain
LINE 10: manner of living, our small rooms, and few domestics, and the little we
LINE 11: see of the world, must make Hunsford extremely dull to a young lady like
LINE 12: yourself; but I hope you will believe us grateful for the condescension,
LINE 13: and that we have done everything in our power to prevent you spending
LINE 14: your time unpleasantly."
LINE 15: Elizabeth was eager with her thanks and assurances of happiness. She had
LINE 16: spent six weeks with great enjoyment; and the pleasure of being with
LINE 17: Charlotte, and the kind attention she had received, must make _her_ feel
LINE 18: the obliged. Mr. Collins was gratified; and with a more smiling
LINE 19: solemnity replied,--
LINE 20: "It gives me the greatest pleasure to hear that you have passed your
LINE 21: time not disagreeably. We have certainly done our best; and most
LINE 22: fortunately having it in our power to introduce you to very superior
LINE 23: society, and from our connection with Rosings, the frequent means of
LINE 24: varying the humble home scene, I think we may flatter ourselves that
LINE 25: your Hunsford visit cannot have been entirely irksome. Our situation
LINE 26: with regard to Lady Catherine's family is, indeed, the sort of
LINE 27: extraordinary advantage and blessing which few can boast. You see on
LINE 28: what a footing we are. You see how continually we are engaged there. In
LINE 29: truth, I must acknowledge, that, with all the disadvantages of this
LINE 30: humble parsonage, I should not think anyone abiding in it an object of
LINE 31: compassion, while they are sharers of our intimacy at Rosings."
LINE 32: Words were insufficient for the elevation of his feelings; and he was
LINE 33: obliged to walk about the room, while Elizabeth tried to unite civility
LINE 34: and truth in a few short sentences.
LINE 35: "You may, in fact, carry a very favourable report of us into
LINE 36: Hertfordshire, my dear cousin. I flatter myself, at least, that you will
LINE 37: be able to do so. Lady Catherine's great attentions to Mrs. Collins you
LINE 38: have been a daily witness of; and altogether I trust it does not appear
LINE 39: that your friend has drawn an unfortunate--but on this point it will be
LINE 40: as well to be silent. Only let me assure you, my dear Miss Elizabeth,
LINE 41: that I can from my heart most cordially wish you equal felicity in
LINE 42: marriage. My dear Charlotte and I have but one mind and one way of
LINE 43: thinking. There is in everything a most remarkable resemblance of
LINE 44: character and ideas between us. We seem to have been designed for each
LINE 45: other."
LINE 46: Elizabeth could safely say that it was a great happiness where that was
LINE 47: the case, and with equal sincerity could add, that she firmly believed
LINE 48: and rejoiced in his domestic comforts. She was not sorry, however, to
LINE 49: have the recital of them interrupted by the entrance of the lady from
LINE 50: whom they sprang. Poor Charlotte! it was melancholy to leave her to such
LINE 51: society! But she had chosen it with her eyes open; and though evidently
LINE 52: regretting that her visitors were to go, she did not seem to ask for
LINE 53: compassion. Her home and her housekeeping, her parish and her poultry,
LINE 54: and all their dependent concerns, had not yet lost their charms.
LINE 55: At length the chaise arrived, the trunks were fastened on, the parcels
LINE 56: placed within, and it was pronounced to be ready. After an affectionate
LINE 57: parting between the friends, Elizabeth was attended to the carriage by
LINE 58: Mr. Collins; and as they walked down the garden, he was commissioning
LINE 59: her with his best respects to all her family, not forgetting his thanks
LINE 60: for the kindness he had received at Longbourn in the winter, and his
LINE 61: compliments to Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner, though unknown. He then handed
LINE 62: her in, Maria followed, and the door was on the point of being closed,
LINE 63: when he suddenly reminded them, with some consternation, that they had
LINE 64: hitherto forgotten to leave any message for the ladies of Rosings.
LINE 65: [Illustration:
LINE 66: "They had forgotten to leave any message"
LINE 67: ]
LINE 68: "But," he added, "you will of course wish to have your humble respects
LINE 69: delivered to them, with your grateful thanks for their kindness to you
LINE 70: while you have been here."
LINE 71: Elizabeth made no objection: the door was then allowed to be shut, and
LINE 72: the carriage drove off.
LINE 73: "Good gracious!" cried Maria, after a few minutes' silence, "it seems
LINE 74: but a day or two since we first came! and yet how many things have
LINE 75: happened!"
LINE 76: "A great many indeed," said her companion, with a sigh.
LINE 77: "We have dined nine times at Rosings, besides drinking tea there twice!
LINE 78: How much I shall have to tell!"
LINE 79: Elizabeth privately added, "And how much I shall have to conceal!"
LINE 80: Their journey was performed without much conversation, or any alarm; and
LINE 81: within four hours of their leaving Hunsford they reached Mr. Gardiner's
LINE 82: house, where they were to remain a few days.
LINE 83: Jane looked well, and Elizabeth had little opportunity of studying her
LINE 84: spirits, amidst the various engagements which the kindness of her aunt
LINE 85: had reserved for them. But Jane was to go home with her, and at
LINE 86: Longbourn there would be leisure enough for observation.
LINE 87: It was not without an effort, meanwhile, that she could wait even for
LINE 88: Longbourn, before she told her sister of Mr. Darcy's proposals. To know
LINE 89: that she had the power of revealing what would so exceedingly astonish
LINE 90: Jane, and must, at the same time, so highly gratify whatever of her own
LINE 91: vanity she had not yet been able to reason away, was such a temptation
LINE 92: to openness as nothing could have conquered, but the state of indecision
LINE 93: in which she remained as to the extent of what she should communicate,
LINE 94: and her fear, if she once entered on the subject, of being hurried into
LINE 95: repeating something of Bingley, which might only grieve her sister
LINE 96: further.
LINE 97: [Illustration:
LINE 98: "How nicely we are crammed in"
LINE 99: ]