LINE 1: [Illustration]
LINE 2: Had Elizabeth's opinion been all drawn from her own family, she could
LINE 3: not have formed a very pleasing picture of conjugal felicity or domestic
LINE 4: comfort. Her father, captivated by youth and beauty, and that appearance
LINE 5: of good-humour which youth and beauty generally give, had married a
LINE 6: woman whose weak understanding and illiberal mind had very early in
LINE 7: their marriage put an end to all real affection for her. Respect,
LINE 8: esteem, and confidence had vanished for ever; and all his views of
LINE 9: domestic happiness were overthrown. But Mr. Bennet was not of a
LINE 10: disposition to seek comfort for the disappointment which his own
LINE 11: imprudence had brought on in any of those pleasures which too often
LINE 12: console the unfortunate for their folly or their vice. He was fond of
LINE 13: the country and of books; and from these tastes had arisen his principal
LINE 14: enjoyments. To his wife he was very little otherwise indebted than as
LINE 15: her ignorance and folly had contributed to his amusement. This is not
LINE 16: the sort of happiness which a man would in general wish to owe to his
LINE 17: wife; but where other powers of entertainment are wanting, the true
LINE 18: philosopher will derive benefit from such as are given.
LINE 19: Elizabeth, however, had never been blind to the impropriety of her
LINE 20: father's behaviour as a husband. She had always seen it with pain; but
LINE 21: respecting his abilities, and grateful for his affectionate treatment of
LINE 22: herself, she endeavoured to forget what she could not overlook, and to
LINE 23: banish from her thoughts that continual breach of conjugal obligation
LINE 24: and decorum which, in exposing his wife to the contempt of her own
LINE 25: children, was so highly reprehensible. But she had never felt so
LINE 26: strongly as now the disadvantages which must attend the children of so
LINE 27: unsuitable a marriage, nor ever been so fully aware of the evils arising
LINE 28: from so ill-judged a direction of talents--talents which, rightly used,
LINE 29: might at least have preserved the respectability of his daughters, even
LINE 30: if incapable of enlarging the mind of his wife.
LINE 31: When Elizabeth had rejoiced over Wickham's departure, she found little
LINE 32: other cause for satisfaction in the loss of the regiment. Their parties
LINE 33: abroad were less varied than before; and at home she had a mother and
LINE 34: sister, whose constant repinings at the dulness of everything around
LINE 35: them threw a real gloom over their domestic circle; and, though Kitty
LINE 36: might in time regain her natural degree of sense, since the disturbers
LINE 37: of her brain were removed, her other sister, from whose disposition
LINE 38: greater evil might be apprehended, was likely to be hardened in all her
LINE 39: folly and assurance, by a situation of such double danger as a
LINE 40: watering-place and a camp. Upon the whole, therefore, she found, what
LINE 41: has been sometimes found before, that an event to which she had looked
LINE 42: forward with impatient desire, did not, in taking place, bring all the
LINE 43: satisfaction she had promised herself. It was consequently necessary to
LINE 44: name some other period for the commencement of actual felicity; to have
LINE 45: some other point on which her wishes and hopes might be fixed, and by
LINE 46: again enjoying the pleasure of anticipation, console herself for the
LINE 47: present, and prepare for another disappointment. Her tour to the Lakes
LINE 48: was now the object of her happiest thoughts: it was her best consolation
LINE 49: for all the uncomfortable hours which the discontentedness of her mother
LINE 50: and Kitty made inevitable; and could she have included Jane in the
LINE 51: scheme, every part of it would have been perfect.
LINE 52: "But it is fortunate," thought she, "that I have something to wish for.
LINE 53: Were the whole arrangement complete, my disappointment would be certain.
LINE 54: But here, by carrying with me one ceaseless source of regret in my
LINE 55: sister's absence, I may reasonably hope to have all my expectations of
LINE 56: pleasure realized. A scheme of which every part promises delight can
LINE 57: never be successful; and general disappointment is only warded off by
LINE 58: the defence of some little peculiar vexation."
LINE 59: When Lydia went away she promised to write very often and very minutely
LINE 60: to her mother and Kitty; but her letters were always long expected, and
LINE 61: always very short. Those to her mother contained little else than that
LINE 62: they were just returned from the library, where such and such officers
LINE 63: had attended them, and where she had seen such beautiful ornaments as
LINE 64: made her quite wild; that she had a new gown, or a new parasol, which
LINE 65: she would have described more fully, but was obliged to leave off in a
LINE 66: violent hurry, as Mrs. Forster called her, and they were going to the
LINE 67: camp; and from her correspondence with her sister there was still less
LINE 68: to be learnt, for her letters to Kitty, though rather longer, were much
LINE 69: too full of lines under the words to be made public.
LINE 70: After the first fortnight or three weeks of her absence, health,
LINE 71: good-humour, and cheerfulness began to reappear at Longbourn. Everything
LINE 72: wore a happier aspect. The families who had been in town for the winter
LINE 73: came back again, and summer finery and summer engagements arose. Mrs.
LINE 74: Bennet was restored to her usual querulous serenity; and by the middle
LINE 75: of June Kitty was so much recovered as to be able to enter Meryton
LINE 76: without tears,--an event of such happy promise as to make Elizabeth
LINE 77: hope, that by the following Christmas she might be so tolerably
LINE 78: reasonable as not to mention an officer above once a day, unless, by
LINE 79: some cruel and malicious arrangement at the War Office, another regiment
LINE 80: should be quartered in Meryton.
LINE 81: The time fixed for the beginning of their northern tour was now fast
LINE 82: approaching; and a fortnight only was wanting of it, when a letter
LINE 83: arrived from Mrs. Gardiner, which at once delayed its commencement and
LINE 84: curtailed its extent. Mr. Gardiner would be prevented by business from
LINE 85: setting out till a fortnight later in July, and must be in London again
LINE 86: within a month; and as that left too short a period for them to go so
LINE 87: far, and see so much as they had proposed, or at least to see it with
LINE 88: the leisure and comfort they had built on, they were obliged to give up
LINE 89: the Lakes, and substitute a more contracted tour; and, according to the
LINE 90: present plan, were to go no farther northward than Derbyshire. In that
LINE 91: county there was enough to be seen to occupy the chief of their three
LINE 92: weeks; and to Mrs. Gardiner it had a peculiarly strong attraction. The
LINE 93: town where she had formerly passed some years of her life, and where
LINE 94: they were now to spend a few days, was probably as great an object of
LINE 95: her curiosity as all the celebrated beauties of Matlock, Chatsworth,
LINE 96: Dovedale, or the Peak.
LINE 97: Elizabeth was excessively disappointed: she had set her heart on seeing
LINE 98: the Lakes; and still thought there might have been time enough. But it
LINE 99: was her business to be satisfied--and certainly her temper to be happy;
LINE 100: and all was soon right again.
LINE 101: With the mention of Derbyshire, there were many ideas connected. It was
LINE 102: impossible for her to see the word without thinking of Pemberley and its
LINE 103: owner. "But surely," said she, "I may enter his county with impunity,
LINE 104: and rob it of a few petrified spars, without his perceiving me."
LINE 105: The period of expectation was now doubled. Four weeks were to pass away
LINE 106: before her uncle and aunt's arrival. But they did pass away, and Mr. and
LINE 107: Mrs. Gardiner, with their four children, did at length appear at
LINE 108: Longbourn. The children, two girls of six and eight years old, and two
LINE 109: younger boys, were to be left under the particular care of their cousin
LINE 110: Jane, who was the general favourite, and whose steady sense and
LINE 111: sweetness of temper exactly adapted her for attending to them in every
LINE 112: way--teaching them, playing with them, and loving them.
LINE 113: The Gardiners stayed only one night at Longbourn, and set off the next
LINE 114: morning with Elizabeth in pursuit of novelty and amusement. One
LINE 115: enjoyment was certain--that of suitableness as companions; a
LINE 116: suitableness which comprehended health and temper to bear
LINE 117: inconveniences--cheerfulness to enhance every pleasure--and affection
LINE 118: and intelligence, which might supply it among themselves if there were
LINE 119: disappointments abroad.
LINE 120: It is not the object of this work to give a description of Derbyshire,
LINE 121: nor of any of the remarkable places through which their route thither
LINE 122: lay--Oxford, Blenheim, Warwick, Kenilworth, Birmingham, etc., are
LINE 123: sufficiently known. A small part of Derbyshire is all the present
LINE 124: concern. To the little town of Lambton, the scene of Mrs. Gardiner's
LINE 125: former residence, and where she had lately learned that some
LINE 126: acquaintance still remained, they bent their steps, after having seen
LINE 127: all the principal wonders of the country; and within five miles of
LINE 128: Lambton, Elizabeth found, from her aunt, that Pemberley was situated. It
LINE 129: was not in their direct road; nor more than a mile or two out of it. In
LINE 130: talking over their route the evening before, Mrs. Gardiner expressed an
LINE 131: inclination to see the place again. Mr. Gardiner declared his
LINE 132: willingness, and Elizabeth was applied to for her approbation.
LINE 133: "My love, should not you like to see a place of which you have heard so
LINE 134: much?" said her aunt. "A place, too, with which so many of your
LINE 135: acquaintance are connected. Wickham passed all his youth there, you
LINE 136: know."
LINE 137: Elizabeth was distressed. She felt that she had no business at
LINE 138: Pemberley, and was obliged to assume a disinclination for seeing it. She
LINE 139: must own that she was tired of great houses: after going over so many,
LINE 140: she really had no pleasure in fine carpets or satin curtains.
LINE 141: Mrs. Gardiner abused her stupidity. "If it were merely a fine house
LINE 142: richly furnished," said she, "I should not care about it myself; but the
LINE 143: grounds are delightful. They have some of the finest woods in the
LINE 144: country."
LINE 145: Elizabeth said no more; but her mind could not acquiesce. The
LINE 146: possibility of meeting Mr. Darcy, while viewing the place, instantly
LINE 147: occurred. It would be dreadful! She blushed at the very idea; and
LINE 148: thought it would be better to speak openly to her aunt, than to run such
LINE 149: a risk. But against this there were objections; and she finally resolved
LINE 150: that it could be the last resource, if her private inquiries as to the
LINE 151: absence of the family were unfavourably answered.
LINE 152: Accordingly, when she retired at night, she asked the chambermaid
LINE 153: whether Pemberley were not a very fine place, what was the name of its
LINE 154: proprietor, and, with no little alarm, whether the family were down for
LINE 155: the summer? A most welcome negative followed the last question; and her
LINE 156: alarms being now removed, she was at leisure to feel a great deal of
LINE 157: curiosity to see the house herself; and when the subject was revived the
LINE 158: next morning, and she was again applied to, could readily answer, and
LINE 159: with a proper air of indifference, that she had not really any dislike
LINE 160: to the scheme.
LINE 161: To Pemberley, therefore, they were to go.
LINE 162: [Illustration:
LINE 163: "Conjecturing as to the date"
LINE 164: ]