LINE 1: [Illustration]
LINE 2: Within a short walk of Longbourn lived a family with whom the Bennets
LINE 3: were particularly intimate. Sir William Lucas had been formerly in trade
LINE 4: in Meryton, where he had made a tolerable fortune, and risen to the
LINE 5: honour of knighthood by an address to the king during his mayoralty. The
LINE 6: distinction had, perhaps, been felt too strongly. It had given him a
LINE 7: disgust to his business and to his residence in a small market town;
LINE 8: and, quitting them both, he had removed with his family to a house about
LINE 9: a mile from Meryton, denominated from that period Lucas Lodge; where he
LINE 10: could think with pleasure of his own importance, and, unshackled by
LINE 11: business, occupy himself solely in being civil to all the world. For,
LINE 12: though elated by his rank, it did not render him supercilious; on the
LINE 13: contrary, he was all attention to everybody. By nature inoffensive,
LINE 14: friendly, and obliging, his presentation at St. James's had made him
LINE 15: courteous.
LINE 16: Lady Lucas was a very good kind of woman, not too clever to be a
LINE 17: valuable neighbour to Mrs. Bennet. They had several children. The eldest
LINE 18: of them, a sensible, intelligent young woman, about twenty-seven, was
LINE 19: Elizabeth's intimate friend.
LINE 20: That the Miss Lucases and the Miss Bennets should meet to talk over a
LINE 21: ball was absolutely necessary; and the morning after the assembly
LINE 22: brought the former to Longbourn to hear and to communicate.
LINE 23: "_You_ began the evening well, Charlotte," said Mrs. Bennet, with civil
LINE 24: self-command, to Miss Lucas. "_You_ were Mr. Bingley's first choice."
LINE 25: "Yes; but he seemed to like his second better."
LINE 26: "Oh, you mean Jane, I suppose, because he danced with her twice. To be
LINE 27: sure that _did_ seem as if he admired her--indeed, I rather believe he
LINE 28: _did_--I heard something about it--but I hardly know what--something
LINE 29: about Mr. Robinson."
LINE 30: "Perhaps you mean what I overheard between him and Mr. Robinson: did not
LINE 31: I mention it to you? Mr. Robinson's asking him how he liked our Meryton
LINE 32: assemblies, and whether he did not think there were a great many pretty
LINE 33: women in the room, and _which_ he thought the prettiest? and his
LINE 34: answering immediately to the last question, 'Oh, the eldest Miss Bennet,
LINE 35: beyond a doubt: there cannot be two opinions on that point.'"
LINE 36: "Upon my word! Well, that was very decided, indeed--that does seem as
LINE 37: if--but, however, it may all come to nothing, you know."
LINE 38: "_My_ overhearings were more to the purpose than _yours_, Eliza," said
LINE 39: Charlotte. "Mr. Darcy is not so well worth listening to as his friend,
LINE 40: is he? Poor Eliza! to be only just _tolerable_."
LINE 41: "I beg you will not put it into Lizzy's head to be vexed by his
LINE 42: ill-treatment, for he is such a disagreeable man that it would be quite
LINE 43: a misfortune to be liked by him. Mrs. Long told me last night that he
LINE 44: sat close to her for half an hour without once opening his lips."
LINE 45: [Illustration: "Without once opening his lips"
LINE 46: [_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]
LINE 47: "Are you quite sure, ma'am? Is not there a little mistake?" said Jane.
LINE 48: "I certainly saw Mr. Darcy speaking to her."
LINE 49: "Ay, because she asked him at last how he liked Netherfield, and he
LINE 50: could not help answering her; but she said he seemed very angry at being
LINE 51: spoke to."
LINE 52: "Miss Bingley told me," said Jane, "that he never speaks much unless
LINE 53: among his intimate acquaintance. With _them_ he is remarkably
LINE 54: agreeable."
LINE 55: "I do not believe a word of it, my dear. If he had been so very
LINE 56: agreeable, he would have talked to Mrs. Long. But I can guess how it
LINE 57: was; everybody says that he is eat up with pride, and I dare say he had
LINE 58: heard somehow that Mrs. Long does not keep a carriage, and had to come
LINE 59: to the ball in a hack chaise."
LINE 60: "I do not mind his not talking to Mrs. Long," said Miss Lucas, "but I
LINE 61: wish he had danced with Eliza."
LINE 62: "Another time, Lizzy," said her mother, "I would not dance with _him_,
LINE 63: if I were you."
LINE 64: "I believe, ma'am, I may safely promise you _never_ to dance with him."
LINE 65: "His pride," said Miss Lucas, "does not offend _me_ so much as pride
LINE 66: often does, because there is an excuse for it. One cannot wonder that so
LINE 67: very fine a young man, with family, fortune, everything in his favour,
LINE 68: should think highly of himself. If I may so express it, he has a _right_
LINE 69: to be proud."
LINE 70: "That is very true," replied Elizabeth, "and I could easily forgive
LINE 71: _his_ pride, if he had not mortified _mine_."
LINE 72: "Pride," observed Mary, who piqued herself upon the solidity of her
LINE 73: reflections, "is a very common failing, I believe. By all that I have
LINE 74: ever read, I am convinced that it is very common indeed; that human
LINE 75: nature is particularly prone to it, and that there are very few of us
LINE 76: who do not cherish a feeling of self-complacency on the score of some
LINE 77: quality or other, real or imaginary. Vanity and pride are different
LINE 78: things, though the words are often used synonymously. A person may be
LINE 79: proud without being vain. Pride relates more to our opinion of
LINE 80: ourselves; vanity to what we would have others think of us."
LINE 81: "If I were as rich as Mr. Darcy," cried a young Lucas, who came with his
LINE 82: sisters, "I should not care how proud I was. I would keep a pack of
LINE 83: foxhounds, and drink a bottle of wine every day."
LINE 84: "Then you would drink a great deal more than you ought," said Mrs.
LINE 85: Bennet; "and if I were to see you at it, I should take away your bottle
LINE 86: directly."
LINE 87: The boy protested that she should not; she continued to declare that she
LINE 88: would; and the argument ended only with the visit.
LINE 89: [Illustration]
LINE 90: [Illustration]