LINE 1: [Illustration]
LINE 2: Not all that Mrs. Bennet, however, with the assistance of her five
LINE 3: daughters, could ask on the subject, was sufficient to draw from her
LINE 4: husband any satisfactory description of Mr. Bingley. They attacked him
LINE 5: in various ways, with barefaced questions, ingenious suppositions, and
LINE 6: distant surmises; but he eluded the skill of them all; and they were at
LINE 7: last obliged to accept the second-hand intelligence of their neighbour,
LINE 8: Lady Lucas. Her report was highly favourable. Sir William had been
LINE 9: delighted with him. He was quite young, wonderfully handsome, extremely
LINE 10: agreeable, and, to crown the whole, he meant to be at the next assembly
LINE 11: with a large party. Nothing could be more delightful! To be fond of
LINE 12: dancing was a certain step towards falling in love; and very lively
LINE 13: hopes of Mr. Bingley's heart were entertained.
LINE 14: "If I can but see one of my daughters happily settled at Netherfield,"
LINE 15: said Mrs. Bennet to her husband, "and all the others equally well
LINE 16: married, I shall have nothing to wish for."
LINE 17: In a few days Mr. Bingley returned Mr. Bennet's visit, and sat about ten
LINE 18: minutes with him in his library. He had entertained hopes of being
LINE 19: admitted to a sight of the young ladies, of whose beauty he had heard
LINE 20: much; but he saw only the father. The ladies were somewhat more
LINE 21: fortunate, for they had the advantage of ascertaining, from an upper
LINE 22: window, that he wore a blue coat and rode a black horse.
LINE 23: An invitation to dinner was soon afterwards despatched; and already had
LINE 24: Mrs. Bennet planned the courses that were to do credit to her
LINE 25: housekeeping, when an answer arrived which deferred it all. Mr. Bingley
LINE 26: was obliged to be in town the following day, and consequently unable to
LINE 27: accept the honour of their invitation, etc. Mrs. Bennet was quite
LINE 28: disconcerted. She could not imagine what business he could have in town
LINE 29: so soon after his arrival in Hertfordshire; and she began to fear that
LINE 30: he might always be flying about from one place to another, and never
LINE 31: settled at Netherfield as he ought to be. Lady Lucas quieted her fears a
LINE 32: little by starting the idea of his
LINE 33: [Illustration:
LINE 34: "When the Party entered"
LINE 35: [_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]
LINE 36: being gone to London only to get a large party for the ball; and a
LINE 37: report soon followed that Mr. Bingley was to bring twelve ladies and
LINE 38: seven gentlemen with him to the assembly. The girls grieved over such a
LINE 39: number of ladies; but were comforted the day before the ball by hearing
LINE 40: that, instead of twelve, he had brought only six with him from London,
LINE 41: his five sisters and a cousin. And when the party entered the
LINE 42: assembly-room, it consisted of only five altogether: Mr. Bingley, his
LINE 43: two sisters, the husband of the eldest, and another young man.
LINE 44: Mr. Bingley was good-looking and gentlemanlike: he had a pleasant
LINE 45: countenance, and easy, unaffected manners. His sisters were fine women,
LINE 46: with an air of decided fashion. His brother-in-law, Mr. Hurst, merely
LINE 47: looked the gentleman; but his friend Mr. Darcy soon drew the attention
LINE 48: of the room by his fine, tall person, handsome features, noble mien, and
LINE 49: the report, which was in general circulation within five minutes after
LINE 50: his entrance, of his having ten thousand a year. The gentlemen
LINE 51: pronounced him to be a fine figure of a man, the ladies declared he was
LINE 52: much handsomer than Mr. Bingley, and he was looked at with great
LINE 53: admiration for about half the evening, till his manners gave a disgust
LINE 54: which turned the tide of his popularity; for he was discovered to be
LINE 55: proud, to be above his company, and above being pleased; and not all his
LINE 56: large estate in Derbyshire could save him from having a most forbidding,
LINE 57: disagreeable countenance, and being unworthy to be compared with his
LINE 58: friend.
LINE 59: Mr. Bingley had soon made himself acquainted with all the principal
LINE 60: people in the room: he was lively and unreserved, danced every dance,
LINE 61: was angry that the ball closed so early, and talked of giving one
LINE 62: himself at Netherfield. Such amiable qualities must speak for
LINE 63: themselves. What a contrast between him and his friend! Mr. Darcy danced
LINE 64: only once with Mrs. Hurst and once with Miss Bingley, declined being
LINE 65: introduced to any other lady, and spent the rest of the evening in
LINE 66: walking about the room, speaking occasionally to one of his own party.
LINE 67: His character was decided. He was the proudest, most disagreeable man in
LINE 68: the world, and everybody hoped that he would never come there again.
LINE 69: Amongst the most violent against him was Mrs. Bennet, whose dislike of
LINE 70: his general behaviour was sharpened into particular resentment by his
LINE 71: having slighted one of her daughters.
LINE 72: Elizabeth Bennet had been obliged, by the scarcity of gentlemen, to sit
LINE 73: down for two dances; and during part of that time, Mr. Darcy had been
LINE 74: standing near enough for her to overhear a conversation between him and
LINE 75: Mr. Bingley, who came from the dance for a few minutes to press his
LINE 76: friend to join it.
LINE 77: "Come, Darcy," said he, "I must have you dance. I hate to see you
LINE 78: standing about by yourself in this stupid manner. You had much better
LINE 79: dance."
LINE 80: "I certainly shall not. You know how I detest it, unless I am
LINE 81: particularly acquainted with my partner. At such an assembly as this, it
LINE 82: would be insupportable. Your sisters are engaged, and there is not
LINE 83: another woman in the room whom it would not be a punishment to me to
LINE 84: stand up with."
LINE 85: "I would not be so fastidious as you are," cried Bingley, "for a
LINE 86: kingdom! Upon my honour, I never met with so many pleasant girls in my
LINE 87: life as I have this evening; and there are several of them, you see,
LINE 88: uncommonly pretty."
LINE 89: "_You_ are dancing with the only handsome girl in the room," said Mr.
LINE 90: Darcy, looking at the eldest Miss Bennet.
LINE 91: "Oh, she is the most beautiful creature I ever beheld! But there is one
LINE 92: of her sisters sitting down just behind you, who is very pretty, and I
LINE 93: dare say very agreeable. Do let me ask my partner to introduce you."
LINE 94: [Illustration:
LINE 95: "She is tolerable"
LINE 96: [_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]
LINE 97: "Which do you mean?" and turning round, he looked for a moment at
LINE 98: Elizabeth, till, catching her eye, he withdrew his own, and coldly said,
LINE 99: "She is tolerable: but not handsome enough to tempt _me_; and I am in no
LINE 100: humour at present to give consequence to young ladies who are slighted
LINE 101: by other men. You had better return to your partner and enjoy her
LINE 102: smiles, for you are wasting your time with me."
LINE 103: Mr. Bingley followed his advice. Mr. Darcy walked off; and Elizabeth
LINE 104: remained with no very cordial feelings towards him. She told the story,
LINE 105: however, with great spirit among her friends; for she had a lively,
LINE 106: playful disposition, which delighted in anything ridiculous.
LINE 107: The evening altogether passed off pleasantly to the whole family. Mrs.
LINE 108: Bennet had seen her eldest daughter much admired by the Netherfield
LINE 109: party. Mr. Bingley had danced with her twice, and she had been
LINE 110: distinguished by his sisters. Jane was as much gratified by this as her
LINE 111: mother could be, though in a quieter way. Elizabeth felt Jane's
LINE 112: pleasure. Mary had heard herself mentioned to Miss Bingley as the most
LINE 113: accomplished girl in the neighbourhood; and Catherine and Lydia had been
LINE 114: fortunate enough to be never without partners, which was all that they
LINE 115: had yet learnt to care for at a ball. They returned, therefore, in good
LINE 116: spirits to Longbourn, the village where they lived, and of which they
LINE 117: were the principal inhabitants. They found Mr. Bennet still up. With a
LINE 118: book, he was regardless of time; and on the present occasion he had a
LINE 119: good deal of curiosity as to the event of an evening which had raised
LINE 120: such splendid expectations. He had rather hoped that all his wife's
LINE 121: views on the stranger would be disappointed; but he soon found that he
LINE 122: had a very different story to hear.
LINE 123: "Oh, my dear Mr. Bennet," as she entered the room, "we have had a most
LINE 124: delightful evening, a most excellent ball. I wish you had been there.
LINE 125: Jane was so admired, nothing could be like it. Everybody said how well
LINE 126: she looked; and Mr. Bingley thought her quite beautiful, and danced with
LINE 127: her twice. Only think of _that_, my dear: he actually danced with her
LINE 128: twice; and she was the only creature in the room that he asked a second
LINE 129: time. First of all, he asked Miss Lucas. I was so vexed to see him stand
LINE 130: up with her; but, however, he did not admire her at all; indeed, nobody
LINE 131: can, you know; and he seemed quite struck with Jane as she was going
LINE 132: down the dance. So he inquired who she was, and got introduced, and
LINE 133: asked her for the two next. Then, the two third he danced with Miss
LINE 134: King, and the two fourth with Maria Lucas, and the two fifth with Jane
LINE 135: again, and the two sixth with Lizzy, and the _Boulanger_----"
LINE 136: "If he had had any compassion for _me_," cried her husband impatiently,
LINE 137: "he would not have danced half so much! For God's sake, say no more of
LINE 138: his partners. O that he had sprained his ancle in the first dance!"
LINE 139: "Oh, my dear," continued Mrs. Bennet, "I am quite delighted with him. He
LINE 140: is so excessively handsome! and his sisters are charming women. I never
LINE 141: in my life saw anything more elegant than their dresses. I dare say the
LINE 142: lace upon Mrs. Hurst's gown----"
LINE 143: Here she was interrupted again. Mr. Bennet protested against any
LINE 144: description of finery. She was therefore obliged to seek another branch
LINE 145: of the subject, and related, with much bitterness of spirit, and some
LINE 146: exaggeration, the shocking rudeness of Mr. Darcy.
LINE 147: "But I can assure you," she added, "that Lizzy does not lose much by not
LINE 148: suiting _his_ fancy; for he is a most disagreeable, horrid man, not at
LINE 149: all worth pleasing. So high and so conceited, that there was no enduring
LINE 150: him! He walked here, and he walked there, fancying himself so very
LINE 151: great! Not handsome enough to dance with! I wish you had been there, my
LINE 152: dear, to have given him one of your set-downs. I quite detest the man."
LINE 153: [Illustration]