LINE 1: [Illustration]
LINE 2: When Jane and Elizabeth were alone, the former, who had been cautious in
LINE 3: her praise of Mr. Bingley before, expressed to her sister how very much
LINE 4: she admired him.
LINE 5: "He is just what a young-man ought to be," said she, "sensible,
LINE 6: good-humoured, lively; and I never saw such happy manners! so much ease,
LINE 7: with such perfect good breeding!"
LINE 8: "He is also handsome," replied Elizabeth, "which a young man ought
LINE 9: likewise to be if he possibly can. His character is thereby complete."
LINE 10: "I was very much flattered by his asking me to dance a second time. I
LINE 11: did not expect such a compliment."
LINE 12: "Did not you? _I_ did for you. But that is one great difference between
LINE 13: us. Compliments always take _you_ by surprise, and _me_ never. What
LINE 14: could be more natural than his asking you again? He could not help
LINE 15: seeing that you were about five times as pretty as every other woman in
LINE 16: the room. No thanks to his gallantry for that. Well, he certainly is
LINE 17: very agreeable, and I give you leave to like him. You have liked many a
LINE 18: stupider person."
LINE 19: "Dear Lizzy!"
LINE 20: "Oh, you are a great deal too apt, you know, to like people in general.
LINE 21: You never see a fault in anybody. All the world are good and agreeable
LINE 22: in your eyes. I never heard you speak ill of a human being in my life."
LINE 23: "I would wish not to be hasty in censuring anyone; but I always speak
LINE 24: what I think."
LINE 25: "I know you do: and it is _that_ which makes the wonder. With _your_
LINE 26: good sense, to be so honestly blind to the follies and nonsense of
LINE 27: others! Affectation of candour is common enough; one meets with it
LINE 28: everywhere. But to be candid without ostentation or design,--to take the
LINE 29: good of everybody's character and make it still better, and say nothing
LINE 30: of the bad,--belongs to you alone. And so, you like this man's sisters,
LINE 31: too, do you? Their manners are not equal to his."
LINE 32: "Certainly not, at first; but they are very pleasing women when you
LINE 33: converse with them. Miss Bingley is to live with her brother, and keep
LINE 34: his house; and I am much mistaken if we shall not find a very charming
LINE 35: neighbour in her."
LINE 36: Elizabeth listened in silence, but was not convinced: their behaviour at
LINE 37: the assembly had not been calculated to please in general; and with more
LINE 38: quickness of observation and less pliancy of temper than her sister, and
LINE 39: with a judgment, too, unassailed by any attention to herself, she was
LINE 40: very little disposed to approve them. They were, in fact, very fine
LINE 41: ladies; not deficient in good-humour when they were pleased, nor in the
LINE 42: power of being agreeable where they chose it; but proud and conceited.
LINE 43: They were rather handsome; had been educated in one of the first private
LINE 44: seminaries in town; had a fortune of twenty thousand pounds; were in the
LINE 45: habit of spending more than they ought, and of associating with people
LINE 46: of rank; and were, therefore, in every respect entitled to think well of
LINE 47: themselves and meanly of others. They were of a respectable family in
LINE 48: the north of England; a circumstance more deeply impressed on their
LINE 49: memories than that their brother's fortune and their own had been
LINE 50: acquired by trade.
LINE 51: Mr. Bingley inherited property to the amount of nearly a hundred
LINE 52: thousand pounds from his father, who had intended to purchase an estate,
LINE 53: but did not live to do it. Mr. Bingley intended it likewise, and
LINE 54: sometimes made choice of his county; but, as he was now provided with a
LINE 55: good house and the liberty of a manor, it was doubtful to many of those
LINE 56: who best knew the easiness of his temper, whether he might not spend the
LINE 57: remainder of his days at Netherfield, and leave the next generation to
LINE 58: purchase.
LINE 59: His sisters were very anxious for his having an estate of his own; but
LINE 60: though he was now established only as a tenant, Miss Bingley was by no
LINE 61: means unwilling to preside at his table; nor was Mrs. Hurst, who had
LINE 62: married a man of more fashion than fortune, less disposed to consider
LINE 63: his house as her home when it suited her. Mr. Bingley had not been of
LINE 64: age two years when he was tempted, by an accidental recommendation, to
LINE 65: look at Netherfield House. He did look at it, and into it, for half an
LINE 66: hour; was pleased with the situation and the principal rooms, satisfied
LINE 67: with what the owner said in its praise, and took it immediately.
LINE 68: Between him and Darcy there was a very steady friendship, in spite of a
LINE 69: great opposition of character. Bingley was endeared to Darcy by the
LINE 70: easiness, openness, and ductility of his temper, though no disposition
LINE 71: could offer a greater contrast to his own, and though with his own he
LINE 72: never appeared dissatisfied. On the strength of Darcy's regard, Bingley
LINE 73: had the firmest reliance, and of his judgment the highest opinion. In
LINE 74: understanding, Darcy was the superior. Bingley was by no means
LINE 75: deficient; but Darcy was clever. He was at the same time haughty,
LINE 76: reserved, and fastidious; and his manners, though well bred, were not
LINE 77: inviting. In that respect his friend had greatly the advantage. Bingley
LINE 78: was sure of being liked wherever he appeared; Darcy was continually
LINE 79: giving offence.
LINE 80: The manner in which they spoke of the Meryton assembly was sufficiently
LINE 81: characteristic. Bingley had never met with pleasanter people or prettier
LINE 82: girls in his life; everybody had been most kind and attentive to him;
LINE 83: there had been no formality, no stiffness; he had soon felt acquainted
LINE 84: with all the room; and as to Miss Bennet, he could not conceive an angel
LINE 85: more beautiful. Darcy, on the contrary, had seen a collection of people
LINE 86: in whom there was little beauty and no fashion, for none of whom he had
LINE 87: felt the smallest interest, and from none received either attention or
LINE 88: pleasure. Miss Bennet he acknowledged to be pretty; but she smiled too
LINE 89: much.
LINE 90: Mrs. Hurst and her sister allowed it to be so; but still they admired
LINE 91: her and liked her, and pronounced her to be a sweet girl, and one whom
LINE 92: they should not object to know more of. Miss Bennet was therefore
LINE 93: established as a sweet girl; and their brother felt authorized by such
LINE 94: commendation to think of her as he chose.
LINE 95: [Illustration: [_Copyright 1894 by George Allen._]]