LINE 1: After Anna Mikháylovna had driven off with her son to visit Count Cyril
LINE 2: Vladímirovich Bezúkhov, Countess Rostóva sat for a long time all
LINE 3: alone applying her handkerchief to her eyes. At last she rang.
LINE 4: "What is the matter with you, my dear?" she said crossly to the maid
LINE 5: who kept her waiting some minutes. "Don't you wish to serve me? Then
LINE 6: I'll find you another place."
LINE 7: The countess was upset by her friend's sorrow and humiliating poverty,
LINE 8: and was therefore out of sorts, a state of mind which with her always
LINE 9: found expression in calling her maid "my dear" and speaking to her
LINE 10: with exaggerated politeness.
LINE 11: "I am very sorry, ma'am," answered the maid.
LINE 12: "Ask the count to come to me."
LINE 13: The count came waddling in to see his wife with a rather guilty look as
LINE 14: usual.
LINE 15: "Well, little countess? What a sauté of game au madère we are to
LINE 16: have, my dear! I tasted it. The thousand rubles I paid for Tarás were
LINE 17: not ill-spent. He is worth it!"
LINE 18: He sat down by his wife, his elbows on his knees and his hands ruffling
LINE 19: his gray hair.
LINE 20: "What are your commands, little countess?"
LINE 21: "You see, my dear... What's that mess?" she said, pointing to his
LINE 22: waistcoat. "It's the sauté, most likely," she added with a smile.
LINE 23: "Well, you see, Count, I want some money."
LINE 24: Her face became sad.
LINE 25: "Oh, little countess!" ... and the count began bustling to get out
LINE 26: his pocketbook.
LINE 27: "I want a great deal, Count! I want five hundred rubles," and taking
LINE 28: out her cambric handkerchief she began wiping her husband's waistcoat.
LINE 29: "Yes, immediately, immediately! Hey, who's there?" he called out
LINE 30: in a tone only used by persons who are certain that those they call will
LINE 31: rush to obey the summons. "Send Dmítri to me!"
LINE 32: Dmítri, a man of good family who had been brought up in the count's
LINE 33: house and now managed all his affairs, stepped softly into the room.
LINE 34: "This is what I want, my dear fellow," said the count to the
LINE 35: deferential young man who had entered. "Bring me..." he reflected
LINE 36: a moment, "yes, bring me seven hundred rubles, yes! But mind, don't
LINE 37: bring me such tattered and dirty notes as last time, but nice clean ones
LINE 38: for the countess."
LINE 39: "Yes, Dmítri, clean ones, please," said the countess, sighing
LINE 40: deeply.
LINE 41: "When would you like them, your excellency?" asked Dmítri. "Allow
LINE 42: me to inform you... But, don't be uneasy," he added, noticing that
LINE 43: the count was beginning to breathe heavily and quickly which was always
LINE 44: a sign of approaching anger. "I was forgetting... Do you wish it
LINE 45: brought at once?"
LINE 46: "Yes, yes; just so! Bring it. Give it to the countess."
LINE 47: "What a treasure that Dmítri is," added the count with a smile when
LINE 48: the young man had departed. "There is never any 'impossible' with
LINE 49: him. That's a thing I hate! Everything is possible."
LINE 50: "Ah, money, Count, money! How much sorrow it causes in the world,"
LINE 51: said the countess. "But I am in great need of this sum."
LINE 52: "You, my little countess, are a notorious spendthrift," said the
LINE 53: count, and having kissed his wife's hand he went back to his study.
LINE 54: When Anna Mikháylovna returned from Count Bezúkhov's the money, all
LINE 55: in clean notes, was lying ready under a handkerchief on the countess'
LINE 56: little table, and Anna Mikháylovna noticed that something was agitating
LINE 57: her.
LINE 58: "Well, my dear?" asked the countess.
LINE 59: "Oh, what a terrible state he is in! One would not know him, he is so
LINE 60: ill! I was only there a few moments and hardly said a word..."
LINE 61: "Annette, for heaven's sake don't refuse me," the countess
LINE 62: began, with a blush that looked very strange on her thin, dignified,
LINE 63: elderly face, and she took the money from under the handkerchief.
LINE 64: Anna Mikháylovna instantly guessed her intention and stooped to be
LINE 65: ready to embrace the countess at the appropriate moment.
LINE 66: "This is for Borís from me, for his outfit."
LINE 67: Anna Mikháylovna was already embracing her and weeping. The countess
LINE 68: wept too. They wept because they were friends, and because they were
LINE 69: kindhearted, and because they—friends from childhood—had to think
LINE 70: about such a base thing as money, and because their youth was over....
LINE 71: But those tears were pleasant to them both.