LINE 1: While these conversations were going on in the reception room and the
LINE 2: princess' room, a carriage containing Pierre (who had been sent for)
LINE 3: and Anna Mikháylovna (who found it necessary to accompany him) was
LINE 4: driving into the court of Count Bezúkhov's house. As the wheels
LINE 5: rolled softly over the straw beneath the windows, Anna Mikháylovna,
LINE 6: having turned with words of comfort to her companion, realized that
LINE 7: he was asleep in his corner and woke him up. Rousing himself, Pierre
LINE 8: followed Anna Mikháylovna out of the carriage, and only then began
LINE 9: to think of the interview with his dying father which awaited him. He
LINE 10: noticed that they had not come to the front entrance but to the back
LINE 11: door. While he was getting down from the carriage steps two men, who
LINE 12: looked like tradespeople, ran hurriedly from the entrance and hid in the
LINE 13: shadow of the wall. Pausing for a moment, Pierre noticed several other
LINE 14: men of the same kind hiding in the shadow of the house on both sides.
LINE 15: But neither Anna Mikháylovna nor the footman nor the coachman, who
LINE 16: could not help seeing these people, took any notice of them. "It seems
LINE 17: to be all right," Pierre concluded, and followed Anna Mikháylovna.
LINE 18: She hurriedly ascended the narrow dimly lit stone staircase, calling to
LINE 19: Pierre, who was lagging behind, to follow. Though he did not see why it
LINE 20: was necessary for him to go to the count at all, still less why he had
LINE 21: to go by the back stairs, yet judging by Anna Mikháylovna's air
LINE 22: of assurance and haste, Pierre concluded that it was all absolutely
LINE 23: necessary. Halfway up the stairs they were almost knocked over by
LINE 24: some men who, carrying pails, came running downstairs, their boots
LINE 25: clattering. These men pressed close to the wall to let Pierre and Anna
LINE 26: Mikháylovna pass and did not evince the least surprise at seeing them
LINE 27: there.
LINE 28: "Is this the way to the princesses' apartments?" asked Anna
LINE 29: Mikháylovna of one of them.
LINE 30: "Yes," replied a footman in a bold loud voice, as if anything were
LINE 31: now permissible; "the door to the left, ma'am."
LINE 32: "Perhaps the count did not ask for me," said Pierre when he reached
LINE 33: the landing. "I'd better go to my own room."
LINE 34: Anna Mikháylovna paused and waited for him to come up.
LINE 35: "Ah, my friend!" she said, touching his arm as she had done her
LINE 36: son's when speaking to him that afternoon, "believe me I suffer no
LINE 37: less than you do, but be a man!"
LINE 38: "But really, hadn't I better go away?" he asked, looking kindly at
LINE 39: her over his spectacles.
LINE 40: "Ah, my dear friend! Forget the wrongs that may have been done you.
LINE 41: Think that he is your father ... perhaps in the agony of death." She
LINE 42: sighed. "I have loved you like a son from the first. Trust yourself to
LINE 43: me, Pierre. I shall not forget your interests."
LINE 44: Pierre did not understand a word, but the conviction that all this had
LINE 45: to be grew stronger, and he meekly followed Anna Mikháylovna who was
LINE 46: already opening a door.
LINE 47: This door led into a back anteroom. An old man, a servant of the
LINE 48: princesses, sat in a corner knitting a stocking. Pierre had never been
LINE 49: in this part of the house and did not even know of the existence of
LINE 50: these rooms. Anna Mikháylovna, addressing a maid who was hurrying past
LINE 51: with a decanter on a tray as "my dear" and "my sweet," asked
LINE 52: about the princess' health and then led Pierre along a stone passage.
LINE 53: The first door on the left led into the princesses' apartments. The
LINE 54: maid with the decanter in her haste had not closed the door (everything
LINE 55: in the house was done in haste at that time), and Pierre and Anna
LINE 56: Mikháylovna in passing instinctively glanced into the room, where
LINE 57: Prince Vasíli and the eldest princess were sitting close together
LINE 58: talking. Seeing them pass, Prince Vasíli drew back with obvious
LINE 59: impatience, while the princess jumped up and with a gesture of
LINE 60: desperation slammed the door with all her might.
LINE 61: This action was so unlike her usual composure and the fear depicted on
LINE 62: Prince Vasíli's face so out of keeping with his dignity that Pierre
LINE 63: stopped and glanced inquiringly over his spectacles at his guide. Anna
LINE 64: Mikháylovna evinced no surprise, she only smiled faintly and sighed, as
LINE 65: if to say that this was no more than she had expected.
LINE 66: "Be a man, my friend. I will look after your interests," said she in
LINE 67: reply to his look, and went still faster along the passage.
LINE 68: Pierre could not make out what it was all about, and still less what
LINE 69: "watching over his interests" meant, but he decided that all these
LINE 70: things had to be. From the passage they went into a large, dimly
LINE 71: lit room adjoining the count's reception room. It was one of those
LINE 72: sumptuous but cold apartments known to Pierre only from the front
LINE 73: approach, but even in this room there now stood an empty bath, and water
LINE 74: had been spilled on the carpet. They were met by a deacon with a censer
LINE 75: and by a servant who passed out on tiptoe without heeding them. They
LINE 76: went into the reception room familiar to Pierre, with two Italian
LINE 77: windows opening into the conservatory, with its large bust and full
LINE 78: length portrait of Catherine the Great. The same people were still
LINE 79: sitting here in almost the same positions as before, whispering to one
LINE 80: another. All became silent and turned to look at the pale tear-worn Anna
LINE 81: Mikháylovna as she entered, and at the big stout figure of Pierre who,
LINE 82: hanging his head, meekly followed her.
LINE 83: Anna Mikháylovna's face expressed a consciousness that the decisive
LINE 84: moment had arrived. With the air of a practical Petersburg lady she now,
LINE 85: keeping Pierre close beside her, entered the room even more boldly than
LINE 86: that afternoon. She felt that as she brought with her the person the
LINE 87: dying man wished to see, her own admission was assured. Casting a rapid
LINE 88: glance at all those in the room and noticing the count's confessor
LINE 89: there, she glided up to him with a sort of amble, not exactly bowing yet
LINE 90: seeming to grow suddenly smaller, and respectfully received the blessing
LINE 91: first of one and then of another priest.
LINE 92: "God be thanked that you are in time," said she to one of the
LINE 93: priests; "all we relatives have been in such anxiety. This young
LINE 94: man is the count's son," she added more softly. "What a terrible
LINE 95: moment!"
LINE 96: Having said this she went up to the doctor.
LINE 97: "Dear doctor," said she, "this young man is the count's son. Is
LINE 98: there any hope?"
LINE 99: The doctor cast a rapid glance upwards and silently shrugged his
LINE 100: shoulders. Anna Mikháylovna with just the same movement raised her
LINE 101: shoulders and eyes, almost closing the latter, sighed, and moved away
LINE 102: from the doctor to Pierre. To him, in a particularly respectful and
LINE 103: tenderly sad voice, she said:
LINE 104: "Trust in His mercy!" and pointing out a small sofa for him to sit
LINE 105: and wait for her, she went silently toward the door that everyone was
LINE 106: watching and it creaked very slightly as she disappeared behind it.
LINE 107: Pierre, having made up his mind to obey his monitress implicitly, moved
LINE 108: toward the sofa she had indicated. As soon as Anna Mikháylovna had
LINE 109: disappeared he noticed that the eyes of all in the room turned to him
LINE 110: with something more than curiosity and sympathy. He noticed that they
LINE 111: whispered to one another, casting significant looks at him with a kind
LINE 112: of awe and even servility. A deference such as he had never before
LINE 113: received was shown him. A strange lady, the one who had been talking to
LINE 114: the priests, rose and offered him her seat; an aide-de-camp picked up
LINE 115: and returned a glove Pierre had dropped; the doctors became respectfully
LINE 116: silent as he passed by, and moved to make way for him. At first Pierre
LINE 117: wished to take another seat so as not to trouble the lady, and also to
LINE 118: pick up the glove himself and to pass round the doctors who were not
LINE 119: even in his way; but all at once he felt that this would not do, and
LINE 120: that tonight he was a person obliged to perform some sort of awful
LINE 121: rite which everyone expected of him, and that he was therefore bound
LINE 122: to accept their services. He took the glove in silence from the
LINE 123: aide-de-camp, and sat down in the lady's chair, placing his huge hands
LINE 124: symmetrically on his knees in the naïve attitude of an Egyptian statue,
LINE 125: and decided in his own mind that all was as it should be, and that in
LINE 126: order not to lose his head and do foolish things he must not act on his
LINE 127: own ideas tonight, but must yield himself up entirely to the will of
LINE 128: those who were guiding him.
LINE 129: Not two minutes had passed before Prince Vasíli with head erect
LINE 130: majestically entered the room. He was wearing his long coat with three
LINE 131: stars on his breast. He seemed to have grown thinner since the morning;
LINE 132: his eyes seemed larger than usual when he glanced round and noticed
LINE 133: Pierre. He went up to him, took his hand (a thing he never used to do),
LINE 134: and drew it downwards as if wishing to ascertain whether it was firmly
LINE 135: fixed on.
LINE 136: "Courage, courage, my friend! He has asked to see you. That is
LINE 137: well!" and he turned to go.
LINE 138: But Pierre thought it necessary to ask: "How is..." and hesitated,
LINE 139: not knowing whether it would be proper to call the dying man "the
LINE 140: count," yet ashamed to call him "father."
LINE 141: "He had another stroke about half an hour ago. Courage, my
LINE 142: friend..."
LINE 143: Pierre's mind was in such a confused state that the word "stroke"
LINE 144: suggested to him a blow from something. He looked at Prince Vasíli
LINE 145: in perplexity, and only later grasped that a stroke was an attack of
LINE 146: illness. Prince Vasíli said something to Lorrain in passing and went
LINE 147: through the door on tiptoe. He could not walk well on tiptoe and his
LINE 148: whole body jerked at each step. The eldest princess followed him, and
LINE 149: the priests and deacons and some servants also went in at the door.
LINE 150: Through that door was heard a noise of things being moved about, and
LINE 151: at last Anna Mikháylovna, still with the same expression, pale but
LINE 152: resolute in the discharge of duty, ran out and touching Pierre lightly
LINE 153: on the arm said:
LINE 154: "The divine mercy is inexhaustible! Unction is about to be
LINE 155: administered. Come."
LINE 156: Pierre went in at the door, stepping on the soft carpet, and noticed
LINE 157: that the strange lady, the aide-de-camp, and some of the servants, all
LINE 158: followed him in, as if there were now no further need for permission to
LINE 159: enter that room.