LINE 1: Silence ensued. The countess looked at her callers, smiling affably,
LINE 2: but not concealing the fact that she would not be distressed if they
LINE 3: now rose and took their leave. The visitor's daughter was already
LINE 4: smoothing down her dress with an inquiring look at her mother, when
LINE 5: suddenly from the next room were heard the footsteps of boys and girls
LINE 6: running to the door and the noise of a chair falling over, and a girl
LINE 7: of thirteen, hiding something in the folds of her short muslin frock,
LINE 8: darted in and stopped short in the middle of the room. It was evident
LINE 9: that she had not intended her flight to bring her so far. Behind her in
LINE 10: the doorway appeared a student with a crimson coat collar, an officer
LINE 11: of the Guards, a girl of fifteen, and a plump rosy-faced boy in a short
LINE 12: jacket.
LINE 13: The count jumped up and, swaying from side to side, spread his arms wide
LINE 14: and threw them round the little girl who had run in.
LINE 15: "Ah, here she is!" he exclaimed laughing. "My pet, whose name day
LINE 16: it is. My dear pet!"
LINE 17: "Ma chère, there is a time for everything," said the countess with
LINE 18: feigned severity. "You spoil her, Ilyá," she added, turning to her
LINE 19: husband.
LINE 20: "How do you do, my dear? I wish you many happy returns of your name
LINE 21: day," said the visitor. "What a charming child," she added,
LINE 22: addressing the mother.
LINE 23: This black-eyed, wide-mouthed girl, not pretty but full of life—with
LINE 24: childish bare shoulders which after her run heaved and shook her
LINE 25: bodice, with black curls tossed backward, thin bare arms, little legs
LINE 26: in lace-frilled drawers, and feet in low slippers—was just at that
LINE 27: charming age when a girl is no longer a child, though the child is not
LINE 28: yet a young woman. Escaping from her father she ran to hide her flushed
LINE 29: face in the lace of her mother's mantilla—not paying the least
LINE 30: attention to her severe remark—and began to laugh. She laughed, and in
LINE 31: fragmentary sentences tried to explain about a doll which she produced
LINE 32: from the folds of her frock.
LINE 33: "Do you see?... My doll... Mimi... You see..." was all Natásha
LINE 34: managed to utter (to her everything seemed funny). She leaned against
LINE 35: her mother and burst into such a loud, ringing fit of laughter that even
LINE 36: the prim visitor could not help joining in.
LINE 37: "Now then, go away and take your monstrosity with you," said the
LINE 38: mother, pushing away her daughter with pretended sternness, and turning
LINE 39: to the visitor she added: "She is my youngest girl."
LINE 40: Natásha, raising her face for a moment from her mother's mantilla,
LINE 41: glanced up at her through tears of laughter, and again hid her face.
LINE 42: The visitor, compelled to look on at this family scene, thought it
LINE 43: necessary to take some part in it.
LINE 44: "Tell me, my dear," said she to Natásha, "is Mimi a relation of
LINE 45: yours? A daughter, I suppose?"
LINE 46: Natásha did not like the visitor's tone of condescension to childish
LINE 47: things. She did not reply, but looked at her seriously.
LINE 48: Meanwhile the younger generation: Borís, the officer, Anna
LINE 49: Mikháylovna's son; Nicholas, the undergraduate, the count's eldest
LINE 50: son; Sónya, the count's fifteen-year-old niece, and little Pétya,
LINE 51: his youngest boy, had all settled down in the drawing room and were
LINE 52: obviously trying to restrain within the bounds of decorum the excitement
LINE 53: and mirth that shone in all their faces. Evidently in the back rooms,
LINE 54: from which they had dashed out so impetuously, the conversation had
LINE 55: been more amusing than the drawing room talk of society scandals, the
LINE 56: weather, and Countess Apráksina. Now and then they glanced at one
LINE 57: another, hardly able to suppress their laughter.
LINE 58: The two young men, the student and the officer, friends from childhood,
LINE 59: were of the same age and both handsome fellows, though not alike. Borís
LINE 60: was tall and fair, and his calm and handsome face had regular, delicate
LINE 61: features. Nicholas was short with curly hair and an open expression.
LINE 62: Dark hairs were already showing on his upper lip, and his whole face
LINE 63: expressed impetuosity and enthusiasm. Nicholas blushed when he entered
LINE 64: the drawing room. He evidently tried to find something to say, but
LINE 65: failed. Borís on the contrary at once found his footing, and related
LINE 66: quietly and humorously how he had known that doll Mimi when she was
LINE 67: still quite a young lady, before her nose was broken; how she had aged
LINE 68: during the five years he had known her, and how her head had cracked
LINE 69: right across the skull. Having said this he glanced at Natásha.
LINE 70: She turned away from him and glanced at her younger brother, who was
LINE 71: screwing up his eyes and shaking with suppressed laughter, and unable
LINE 72: to control herself any longer, she jumped up and rushed from the room as
LINE 73: fast as her nimble little feet would carry her. Borís did not laugh.
LINE 74: "You were meaning to go out, weren't you, Mamma? Do you want the
LINE 75: carriage?" he asked his mother with a smile.
LINE 76: "Yes, yes, go and tell them to get it ready," she answered,
LINE 77: returning his smile.
LINE 78: Borís quietly left the room and went in search of Natásha. The plump
LINE 79: boy ran after them angrily, as if vexed that their program had been
LINE 80: disturbed.