LINE 1: Anna Pávlovna's reception was in full swing. The spindles hummed
LINE 2: steadily and ceaselessly on all sides. With the exception of the aunt,
LINE 3: beside whom sat only one elderly lady, who with her thin careworn face
LINE 4: was rather out of place in this brilliant society, the whole company had
LINE 5: settled into three groups. One, chiefly masculine, had formed round
LINE 6: the abbé. Another, of young people, was grouped round the beautiful
LINE 7: Princess Hélène, Prince Vasíli's daughter, and the little Princess
LINE 8: Bolkónskaya, very pretty and rosy, though rather too plump for her age.
LINE 9: The third group was gathered round Mortemart and Anna Pávlovna.
LINE 10: The vicomte was a nice-looking young man with soft features and polished
LINE 11: manners, who evidently considered himself a celebrity but out of
LINE 12: politeness modestly placed himself at the disposal of the circle in
LINE 13: which he found himself. Anna Pávlovna was obviously serving him up as
LINE 14: a treat to her guests. As a clever maître d'hôtel serves up as a
LINE 15: specially choice delicacy a piece of meat that no one who had seen it in
LINE 16: the kitchen would have cared to eat, so Anna Pávlovna served up to
LINE 17: her guests, first the vicomte and then the abbé, as peculiarly choice
LINE 18: morsels. The group about Mortemart immediately began discussing the
LINE 19: murder of the Duc d'Enghien. The vicomte said that the Duc d'Enghien
LINE 20: had perished by his own magnanimity, and that there were particular
LINE 21: reasons for Buonaparte's hatred of him.
LINE 22: "Ah, yes! Do tell us all about it, Vicomte," said Anna Pávlovna,
LINE 23: with a pleasant feeling that there was something à la Louis XV in the
LINE 24: sound of that sentence: "Contez nous çela, Vicomte."
LINE 25: The vicomte bowed and smiled courteously in token of his willingness to
LINE 26: comply. Anna Pávlovna arranged a group round him, inviting everyone to
LINE 27: listen to his tale.
LINE 28: "The vicomte knew the duc personally," whispered Anna Pávlovna to
LINE 29: one of the guests. "The vicomte is a wonderful raconteur," said she
LINE 30: to another. "How evidently he belongs to the best society," said she
LINE 31: to a third; and the vicomte was served up to the company in the choicest
LINE 32: and most advantageous style, like a well-garnished joint of roast beef
LINE 33: on a hot dish.
LINE 34: The vicomte wished to begin his story and gave a subtle smile.
LINE 35: "Come over here, Hélène, dear," said Anna Pávlovna to the
LINE 36: beautiful young princess who was sitting some way off, the center of
LINE 37: another group.
LINE 38: The princess smiled. She rose with the same unchanging smile with which
LINE 39: she had first entered the room—the smile of a perfectly beautiful
LINE 40: woman. With a slight rustle of her white dress trimmed with moss
LINE 41: and ivy, with a gleam of white shoulders, glossy hair, and sparkling
LINE 42: diamonds, she passed between the men who made way for her, not looking
LINE 43: at any of them but smiling on all, as if graciously allowing each the
LINE 44: privilege of admiring her beautiful figure and shapely shoulders,
LINE 45: back, and bosom—which in the fashion of those days were very much
LINE 46: exposed—and she seemed to bring the glamour of a ballroom with her as
LINE 47: she moved toward Anna Pávlovna. Hélène was so lovely that not only
LINE 48: did she not show any trace of coquetry, but on the contrary she even
LINE 49: appeared shy of her unquestionable and all too victorious beauty. She
LINE 50: seemed to wish, but to be unable, to diminish its effect.
LINE 51: "How lovely!" said everyone who saw her; and the vicomte lifted his
LINE 52: shoulders and dropped his eyes as if startled by something extraordinary
LINE 53: when she took her seat opposite and beamed upon him also with her
LINE 54: unchanging smile.
LINE 55: "Madame, I doubt my ability before such an audience," said he,
LINE 56: smilingly inclining his head.
LINE 57: The princess rested her bare round arm on a little table and considered
LINE 58: a reply unnecessary. She smilingly waited. All the time the story was
LINE 59: being told she sat upright, glancing now at her beautiful round arm,
LINE 60: altered in shape by its pressure on the table, now at her still more
LINE 61: beautiful bosom, on which she readjusted a diamond necklace. From time
LINE 62: to time she smoothed the folds of her dress, and whenever the story
LINE 63: produced an effect she glanced at Anna Pávlovna, at once adopted just
LINE 64: the expression she saw on the maid of honor's face, and again relapsed
LINE 65: into her radiant smile.
LINE 66: The little princess had also left the tea table and followed Hélène.
LINE 67: "Wait a moment, I'll get my work.... Now then, what are you
LINE 68: thinking of?" she went on, turning to Prince Hippolyte. "Fetch me my
LINE 69: workbag."
LINE 70: There was a general movement as the princess, smiling and talking
LINE 71: merrily to everyone at once, sat down and gaily arranged herself in her
LINE 72: seat.
LINE 73: "Now I am all right," she said, and asking the vicomte to begin, she
LINE 74: took up her work.
LINE 75: Prince Hippolyte, having brought the workbag, joined the circle and
LINE 76: moving a chair close to hers seated himself beside her.
LINE 77: Le charmant Hippolyte was surprising by his extraordinary resemblance
LINE 78: to his beautiful sister, but yet more by the fact that in spite of
LINE 79: this resemblance he was exceedingly ugly. His features were like his
LINE 80: sister's, but while in her case everything was lit up by a joyous,
LINE 81: self-satisfied, youthful, and constant smile of animation, and by the
LINE 82: wonderful classic beauty of her figure, his face on the contrary
LINE 83: was dulled by imbecility and a constant expression of sullen
LINE 84: self-confidence, while his body was thin and weak. His eyes, nose, and
LINE 85: mouth all seemed puckered into a vacant, wearied grimace, and his arms
LINE 86: and legs always fell into unnatural positions.
LINE 87: "It's not going to be a ghost story?" said he, sitting down beside
LINE 88: the princess and hastily adjusting his lorgnette, as if without this
LINE 89: instrument he could not begin to speak.
LINE 90: "Why no, my dear fellow," said the astonished narrator, shrugging
LINE 91: his shoulders.
LINE 92: "Because I hate ghost stories," said Prince Hippolyte in a tone
LINE 93: which showed that he only understood the meaning of his words after he
LINE 94: had uttered them.
LINE 95: He spoke with such self-confidence that his hearers could not be sure
LINE 96: whether what he said was very witty or very stupid. He was dressed in
LINE 97: a dark-green dress coat, knee breeches of the color of cuisse de nymphe
LINE 98: effrayée, as he called it, shoes, and silk stockings.
LINE 99: The vicomte told his tale very neatly. It was an anecdote, then current,
LINE 100: to the effect that the Duc d'Enghien had gone secretly to Paris to
LINE 101: visit Mademoiselle George; that at her house he came upon Bonaparte,
LINE 102: who also enjoyed the famous actress' favors, and that in his presence
LINE 103: Napoleon happened to fall into one of the fainting fits to which he was
LINE 104: subject, and was thus at the duc's mercy. The latter spared him, and
LINE 105: this magnanimity Bonaparte subsequently repaid by death.
LINE 106: The story was very pretty and interesting, especially at the point
LINE 107: where the rivals suddenly recognized one another; and the ladies looked
LINE 108: agitated.
LINE 109: "Charming!" said Anna Pávlovna with an inquiring glance at the
LINE 110: little princess.
LINE 111: "Charming!" whispered the little princess, sticking the needle into
LINE 112: her work as if to testify that the interest and fascination of the story
LINE 113: prevented her from going on with it.
LINE 114: The vicomte appreciated this silent praise and smiling gratefully
LINE 115: prepared to continue, but just then Anna Pávlovna, who had kept a
LINE 116: watchful eye on the young man who so alarmed her, noticed that he was
LINE 117: talking too loudly and vehemently with the abbé, so she hurried to the
LINE 118: rescue. Pierre had managed to start a conversation with the abbé about
LINE 119: the balance of power, and the latter, evidently interested by the young
LINE 120: man's simple-minded eagerness, was explaining his pet theory. Both
LINE 121: were talking and listening too eagerly and too naturally, which was why
LINE 122: Anna Pávlovna disapproved.
LINE 123: "The means are ... the balance of power in Europe and the rights of
LINE 124: the people," the abbé was saying. "It is only necessary for one
LINE 125: powerful nation like Russia—barbaric as she is said to be—to place
LINE 126: herself disinterestedly at the head of an alliance having for its object
LINE 127: the maintenance of the balance of power of Europe, and it would save the
LINE 128: world!"
LINE 129: "But how are you to get that balance?" Pierre was beginning.
LINE 130: At that moment Anna Pávlovna came up and, looking severely at Pierre,
LINE 131: asked the Italian how he stood Russian climate. The Italian's
LINE 132: face instantly changed and assumed an offensively affected, sugary
LINE 133: expression, evidently habitual to him when conversing with women.
LINE 134: "I am so enchanted by the brilliancy of the wit and culture of the
LINE 135: society, more especially of the feminine society, in which I have had
LINE 136: the honor of being received, that I have not yet had time to think of
LINE 137: the climate," said he.
LINE 138: Not letting the abbé and Pierre escape, Anna Pávlovna, the more
LINE 139: conveniently to keep them under observation, brought them into the
LINE 140: larger circle.