LINE 1: Having thanked Anna Pávlovna for her charming soiree, the guests began
LINE 2: to take their leave.
LINE 3: Pierre was ungainly. Stout, about the average height, broad, with huge
LINE 4: red hands; he did not know, as the saying is, how to enter a drawing
LINE 5: room and still less how to leave one; that is, how to say something
LINE 6: particularly agreeable before going away. Besides this he was
LINE 7: absent-minded. When he rose to go, he took up instead of his own, the
LINE 8: general's three-cornered hat, and held it, pulling at the plume,
LINE 9: till the general asked him to restore it. All his absent-mindedness and
LINE 10: inability to enter a room and converse in it was, however, redeemed by
LINE 11: his kindly, simple, and modest expression. Anna Pávlovna turned toward
LINE 12: him and, with a Christian mildness that expressed forgiveness of his
LINE 13: indiscretion, nodded and said: "I hope to see you again, but I also
LINE 14: hope you will change your opinions, my dear Monsieur Pierre."
LINE 15: When she said this, he did not reply and only bowed, but again everybody
LINE 16: saw his smile, which said nothing, unless perhaps, "Opinions are
LINE 17: opinions, but you see what a capital, good-natured fellow I am." And
LINE 18: everyone, including Anna Pávlovna, felt this.
LINE 19: Prince Andrew had gone out into the hall, and, turning his shoulders
LINE 20: to the footman who was helping him on with his cloak, listened
LINE 21: indifferently to his wife's chatter with Prince Hippolyte who had also
LINE 22: come into the hall. Prince Hippolyte stood close to the pretty, pregnant
LINE 23: princess, and stared fixedly at her through his eyeglass.
LINE 24: "Go in, Annette, or you will catch cold," said the little princess,
LINE 25: taking leave of Anna Pávlovna. "It is settled," she added in a low
LINE 26: voice.
LINE 27: Anna Pávlovna had already managed to speak to Lise about the match she
LINE 28: contemplated between Anatole and the little princess' sister-in-law.
LINE 29: "I rely on you, my dear," said Anna Pávlovna, also in a low tone.
LINE 30: "Write to her and let me know how her father looks at the matter. Au
LINE 31: revoir! "—and she left the hall.
LINE 32: Prince Hippolyte approached the little princess and, bending his face
LINE 33: close to her, began to whisper something.
LINE 34: Two footmen, the princess' and his own, stood holding a shawl and
LINE 35: a cloak, waiting for the conversation to finish. They listened to
LINE 36: the French sentences which to them were meaningless, with an air of
LINE 37: understanding but not wishing to appear to do so. The princess as usual
LINE 38: spoke smilingly and listened with a laugh.
LINE 39: "I am very glad I did not go to the ambassador's," said Prince
LINE 40: Hippolyte "—so dull—. It has been a delightful evening, has it
LINE 41: not? Delightful!"
LINE 42: "They say the ball will be very good," replied the princess, drawing
LINE 43: up her downy little lip. "All the pretty women in society will be
LINE 44: there."
LINE 45: "Not all, for you will not be there; not all," said Prince Hippolyte
LINE 46: smiling joyfully; and snatching the shawl from the footman, whom he
LINE 47: even pushed aside, he began wrapping it round the princess. Either from
LINE 48: awkwardness or intentionally (no one could have said which) after the
LINE 49: shawl had been adjusted he kept his arm around her for a long time, as
LINE 50: though embracing her.
LINE 51: Still smiling, she gracefully moved away, turning and glancing at her
LINE 52: husband. Prince Andrew's eyes were closed, so weary and sleepy did he
LINE 53: seem.
LINE 54: "Are you ready?" he asked his wife, looking past her.
LINE 55: Prince Hippolyte hurriedly put on his cloak, which in the latest fashion
LINE 56: reached to his very heels, and, stumbling in it, ran out into the porch
LINE 57: following the princess, whom a footman was helping into the carriage.
LINE 58: "Princesse, au revoir," cried he, stumbling with his tongue as well
LINE 59: as with his feet.
LINE 60: The princess, picking up her dress, was taking her seat in the dark
LINE 61: carriage, her husband was adjusting his saber; Prince Hippolyte, under
LINE 62: pretense of helping, was in everyone's way.
LINE 63: "Allow me, sir," said Prince Andrew in Russian in a cold,
LINE 64: disagreeable tone to Prince Hippolyte who was blocking his path.
LINE 65: "I am expecting you, Pierre," said the same voice, but gently and
LINE 66: affectionately.
LINE 67: The postilion started, the carriage wheels rattled. Prince Hippolyte
LINE 68: laughed spasmodically as he stood in the porch waiting for the vicomte
LINE 69: whom he had promised to take home.
LINE 70: "Well, mon cher," said the vicomte, having seated himself beside
LINE 71: Hippolyte in the carriage, "your little princess is very nice, very
LINE 72: nice indeed, quite French," and he kissed the tips of his fingers.
LINE 73: Hippolyte burst out laughing.
LINE 74: "Do you know, you are a terrible chap for all your innocent airs,"
LINE 75: continued the vicomte. "I pity the poor husband, that little officer
LINE 76: who gives himself the airs of a monarch."
LINE 77: Hippolyte spluttered again, and amid his laughter said, "And you were
LINE 78: saying that the Russian ladies are not equal to the French? One has to
LINE 79: know how to deal with them."
LINE 80: Pierre reaching the house first went into Prince Andrew's study like
LINE 81: one quite at home, and from habit immediately lay down on the sofa, took
LINE 82: from the shelf the first book that came to his hand (it was Caesar's
LINE 83: Commentaries), and resting on his elbow, began reading it in the middle.
LINE 84: "What have you done to Mlle Schérer? She will be quite ill now,"
LINE 85: said Prince Andrew, as he entered the study, rubbing his small white
LINE 86: hands.
LINE 87: Pierre turned his whole body, making the sofa creak. He lifted his eager
LINE 88: face to Prince Andrew, smiled, and waved his hand.
LINE 89: "That abbé is very interesting but he does not see the thing in the
LINE 90: right light.... In my opinion perpetual peace is possible but—I do not
LINE 91: know how to express it ... not by a balance of political power...."
LINE 92: It was evident that Prince Andrew was not interested in such abstract
LINE 93: conversation.
LINE 94: "One can't everywhere say all one thinks, mon cher. Well, have
LINE 95: you at last decided on anything? Are you going to be a guardsman or a
LINE 96: diplomatist?" asked Prince Andrew after a momentary silence.
LINE 97: Pierre sat up on the sofa, with his legs tucked under him.
LINE 98: "Really, I don't yet know. I don't like either the one or the
LINE 99: other."
LINE 100: "But you must decide on something! Your father expects it."
LINE 101: Pierre at the age of ten had been sent abroad with an abbé as tutor,
LINE 102: and had remained away till he was twenty. When he returned to Moscow
LINE 103: his father dismissed the abbé and said to the young man, "Now go
LINE 104: to Petersburg, look round, and choose your profession. I will agree to
LINE 105: anything. Here is a letter to Prince Vasíli, and here is money. Write
LINE 106: to me all about it, and I will help you in everything." Pierre had
LINE 107: already been choosing a career for three months, and had not decided
LINE 108: on anything. It was about this choice that Prince Andrew was speaking.
LINE 109: Pierre rubbed his forehead.
LINE 110: "But he must be a Freemason," said he, referring to the abbé whom
LINE 111: he had met that evening.
LINE 112: "That is all nonsense." Prince Andrew again interrupted him, "let
LINE 113: us talk business. Have you been to the Horse Guards?"
LINE 114: "No, I have not; but this is what I have been thinking and wanted
LINE 115: to tell you. There is a war now against Napoleon. If it were a war for
LINE 116: freedom I could understand it and should be the first to enter the army;
LINE 117: but to help England and Austria against the greatest man in the world is
LINE 118: not right."
LINE 119: Prince Andrew only shrugged his shoulders at Pierre's childish words.
LINE 120: He put on the air of one who finds it impossible to reply to such
LINE 121: nonsense, but it would in fact have been difficult to give any other
LINE 122: answer than the one Prince Andrew gave to this naïve question.
LINE 123: "If no one fought except on his own conviction, there would be no
LINE 124: wars," he said.
LINE 125: "And that would be splendid," said Pierre.
LINE 126: Prince Andrew smiled ironically.
LINE 127: "Very likely it would be splendid, but it will never come about...."
LINE 128: "Well, why are you going to the war?" asked Pierre.
LINE 129: "What for? I don't know. I must. Besides that I am going...." He
LINE 130: paused. "I am going because the life I am leading here does not suit
LINE 131: me!"