LINE 1: Prince Vasíli kept the promise he had given to Princess Drubetskáya
LINE 2: who had spoken to him on behalf of her only son Borís on the evening of
LINE 3: Anna Pávlovna's soiree. The matter was mentioned to the Emperor, an
LINE 4: exception made, and Borís transferred into the regiment of Semënov
LINE 5: Guards with the rank of cornet. He received, however, no appointment
LINE 6: to Kutúzov's staff despite all Anna Mikháylovna's endeavors and
LINE 7: entreaties. Soon after Anna Pávlovna's reception Anna Mikháylovna
LINE 8: returned to Moscow and went straight to her rich relations, the
LINE 9: Rostóvs, with whom she stayed when in the town and where her darling
LINE 10: Bóry, who had only just entered a regiment of the line and was being
LINE 11: at once transferred to the Guards as a cornet, had been educated from
LINE 12: childhood and lived for years at a time. The Guards had already left
LINE 13: Petersburg on the tenth of August, and her son, who had remained in
LINE 14: Moscow for his equipment, was to join them on the march to Radzivílov.
LINE 15: It was St. Natalia's day and the name day of two of the Rostóvs—the
LINE 16: mother and the youngest daughter—both named Nataly. Ever since
LINE 17: the morning, carriages with six horses had been coming and going
LINE 18: continually, bringing visitors to the Countess Rostóva's big house on
LINE 19: the Povarskáya, so well known to all Moscow. The countess herself and
LINE 20: her handsome eldest daughter were in the drawing room with the visitors
LINE 21: who came to congratulate, and who constantly succeeded one another in
LINE 22: relays.
LINE 23: The countess was a woman of about forty-five, with a thin Oriental type
LINE 24: of face, evidently worn out with childbearing—she had had twelve.
LINE 25: A languor of motion and speech, resulting from weakness, gave her a
LINE 26: distinguished air which inspired respect. Princess Anna Mikháylovna
LINE 27: Drubetskáya, who as a member of the household was also seated in the
LINE 28: drawing room, helped to receive and entertain the visitors. The young
LINE 29: people were in one of the inner rooms, not considering it necessary to
LINE 30: take part in receiving the visitors. The count met the guests and saw
LINE 31: them off, inviting them all to dinner.
LINE 32: "I am very, very grateful to you, mon cher," or "ma chère"—he
LINE 33: called everyone without exception and without the slightest variation
LINE 34: in his tone, "my dear," whether they were above or below him in
LINE 35: rank—"I thank you for myself and for our two dear ones whose name
LINE 36: day we are keeping. But mind you come to dinner or I shall be offended,
LINE 37: ma chère! On behalf of the whole family I beg you to come, mon cher!"
LINE 38: These words he repeated to everyone without exception or variation, and
LINE 39: with the same expression on his full, cheerful, clean-shaven face, the
LINE 40: same firm pressure of the hand and the same quick, repeated bows. As
LINE 41: soon as he had seen a visitor off he returned to one of those who were
LINE 42: still in the drawing room, drew a chair toward him or her, and jauntily
LINE 43: spreading out his legs and putting his hands on his knees with the air
LINE 44: of a man who enjoys life and knows how to live, he swayed to and
LINE 45: fro with dignity, offered surmises about the weather, or touched on
LINE 46: questions of health, sometimes in Russian and sometimes in very bad but
LINE 47: self-confident French; then again, like a man weary but unflinching in
LINE 48: the fulfillment of duty, he rose to see some visitors off and, stroking
LINE 49: his scanty gray hairs over his bald patch, also asked them to dinner.
LINE 50: Sometimes on his way back from the anteroom he would pass through the
LINE 51: conservatory and pantry into the large marble dining hall, where tables
LINE 52: were being set out for eighty people; and looking at the footmen, who
LINE 53: were bringing in silver and china, moving tables, and unfolding damask
LINE 54: table linen, he would call Dmítri Vasílevich, a man of good family and
LINE 55: the manager of all his affairs, and while looking with pleasure at the
LINE 56: enormous table would say: "Well, Dmítri, you'll see that things are
LINE 57: all as they should be? That's right! The great thing is the serving,
LINE 58: that's it." And with a complacent sigh he would return to the
LINE 59: drawing room.
LINE 60: "Márya Lvóvna Karágina and her daughter!" announced the
LINE 61: countess' gigantic footman in his bass voice, entering the drawing
LINE 62: room. The countess reflected a moment and took a pinch from a gold
LINE 63: snuffbox with her husband's portrait on it.
LINE 64: "I'm quite worn out by these callers. However, I'll see her and
LINE 65: no more. She is so affected. Ask her in," she said to the footman in a
LINE 66: sad voice, as if saying: "Very well, finish me off."
LINE 67: A tall, stout, and proud-looking woman, with a round-faced smiling
LINE 68: daughter, entered the drawing room, their dresses rustling.
LINE 69: "Dear Countess, what an age... She has been laid up, poor child ...
LINE 70: at the Razumóvski's ball ... and Countess Apráksina ... I was
LINE 71: so delighted..." came the sounds of animated feminine voices,
LINE 72: interrupting one another and mingling with the rustling of dresses and
LINE 73: the scraping of chairs. Then one of those conversations began which last
LINE 74: out until, at the first pause, the guests rise with a rustle of dresses
LINE 75: and say, "I am so delighted... Mamma's health... and Countess
LINE 76: Apráksina..." and then, again rustling, pass into the anteroom, put
LINE 77: on cloaks or mantles, and drive away. The conversation was on the chief
LINE 78: topic of the day: the illness of the wealthy and celebrated beau of
LINE 79: Catherine's day, Count Bezúkhov, and about his illegitimate son
LINE 80: Pierre, the one who had behaved so improperly at Anna Pávlovna's
LINE 81: reception.
LINE 82: "I am so sorry for the poor count," said the visitor. "He is in
LINE 83: such bad health, and now this vexation about his son is enough to kill
LINE 84: him!"
LINE 85: "What is that?" asked the countess as if she did not know what the
LINE 86: visitor alluded to, though she had already heard about the cause of
LINE 87: Count Bezúkhov's distress some fifteen times.
LINE 88: "That's what comes of a modern education," exclaimed the visitor.
LINE 89: "It seems that while he was abroad this young man was allowed to do
LINE 90: as he liked, now in Petersburg I hear he has been doing such terrible
LINE 91: things that he has been expelled by the police."
LINE 92: "You don't say so!" replied the countess.
LINE 93: "He chose his friends badly," interposed Anna Mikháylovna.
LINE 94: "Prince Vasíli's son, he, and a certain Dólokhov have, it is said,
LINE 95: been up to heaven only knows what! And they have had to suffer for it.
LINE 96: Dólokhov has been degraded to the ranks and Bezúkhov's son sent
LINE 97: back to Moscow. Anatole Kurágin's father managed somehow to get his
LINE 98: son's affair hushed up, but even he was ordered out of Petersburg."
LINE 99: "But what have they been up to?" asked the countess.
LINE 100: "They are regular brigands, especially Dólokhov," replied the
LINE 101: visitor. "He is a son of Márya Ivánovna Dólokhova, such a worthy
LINE 102: woman, but there, just fancy! Those three got hold of a bear somewhere,
LINE 103: put it in a carriage, and set off with it to visit some actresses! The
LINE 104: police tried to interfere, and what did the young men do? They tied
LINE 105: a policeman and the bear back to back and put the bear into the Moyka
LINE 106: Canal. And there was the bear swimming about with the policeman on his
LINE 107: back!"
LINE 108: "What a nice figure the policeman must have cut, my dear!" shouted
LINE 109: the count, dying with laughter.
LINE 110: "Oh, how dreadful! How can you laugh at it, Count?"
LINE 111: Yet the ladies themselves could not help laughing.
LINE 112: "It was all they could do to rescue the poor man," continued the
LINE 113: visitor. "And to think it is Cyril Vladímirovich Bezúkhov's son
LINE 114: who amuses himself in this sensible manner! And he was said to be so
LINE 115: well educated and clever. This is all that his foreign education has
LINE 116: done for him! I hope that here in Moscow no one will receive him, in
LINE 117: spite of his money. They wanted to introduce him to me, but I quite
LINE 118: declined: I have my daughters to consider."
LINE 119: "Why do you say this young man is so rich?" asked the countess,
LINE 120: turning away from the girls, who at once assumed an air of inattention.
LINE 121: "His children are all illegitimate. I think Pierre also is
LINE 122: illegitimate."
LINE 123: The visitor made a gesture with her hand.
LINE 124: "I should think he has a score of them."
LINE 125: Princess Anna Mikháylovna intervened in the conversation, evidently
LINE 126: wishing to show her connections and knowledge of what went on in
LINE 127: society.
LINE 128: "The fact of the matter is," said she significantly, and also in a
LINE 129: half whisper, "everyone knows Count Cyril's reputation.... He has
LINE 130: lost count of his children, but this Pierre was his favorite."
LINE 131: "How handsome the old man still was only a year ago!" remarked the
LINE 132: countess. "I have never seen a handsomer man."
LINE 133: "He is very much altered now," said Anna Mikháylovna. "Well, as
LINE 134: I was saying, Prince Vasíli is the next heir through his wife, but the
LINE 135: count is very fond of Pierre, looked after his education, and wrote to
LINE 136: the Emperor about him; so that in the case of his death—and he is
LINE 137: so ill that he may die at any moment, and Dr. Lorrain has come from
LINE 138: Petersburg—no one knows who will inherit his immense fortune, Pierre
LINE 139: or Prince Vasíli. Forty thousand serfs and millions of rubles! I know
LINE 140: it all very well for Prince Vasíli told me himself. Besides, Cyril
LINE 141: Vladímirovich is my mother's second cousin. He's also my Bóry's
LINE 142: godfather," she added, as if she attached no importance at all to the
LINE 143: fact.
LINE 144: "Prince Vasíli arrived in Moscow yesterday. I hear he has come on
LINE 145: some inspection business," remarked the visitor.
LINE 146: "Yes, but between ourselves," said the princess, "that is a
LINE 147: pretext. The fact is he has come to see Count Cyril Vladímirovich,
LINE 148: hearing how ill he is."
LINE 149: "But do you know, my dear, that was a capital joke," said the count;
LINE 150: and seeing that the elder visitor was not listening, he turned to the
LINE 151: young ladies. "I can just imagine what a funny figure that policeman
LINE 152: cut!"
LINE 153: And as he waved his arms to impersonate the policeman, his portly form
LINE 154: again shook with a deep ringing laugh, the laugh of one who always eats
LINE 155: well and, in particular, drinks well. "So do come and dine with us!"
LINE 156: he said.