LINE 1: When Natásha ran out of the drawing room she only went as far as the
LINE 2: conservatory. There she paused and stood listening to the conversation
LINE 3: in the drawing room, waiting for Borís to come out. She was already
LINE 4: growing impatient, and stamped her foot, ready to cry at his not coming
LINE 5: at once, when she heard the young man's discreet steps approaching
LINE 6: neither quickly nor slowly. At this Natásha dashed swiftly among the
LINE 7: flower tubs and hid there.
LINE 8: Borís paused in the middle of the room, looked round, brushed a little
LINE 9: dust from the sleeve of his uniform, and going up to a mirror examined
LINE 10: his handsome face. Natásha, very still, peered out from her ambush,
LINE 11: waiting to see what he would do. He stood a little while before the
LINE 12: glass, smiled, and walked toward the other door. Natásha was about to
LINE 13: call him but changed her mind. "Let him look for me," thought she.
LINE 14: Hardly had Borís gone than Sónya, flushed, in tears, and muttering
LINE 15: angrily, came in at the other door. Natásha checked her first impulse
LINE 16: to run out to her, and remained in her hiding place, watching—as
LINE 17: under an invisible cap—to see what went on in the world. She was
LINE 18: experiencing a new and peculiar pleasure. Sónya, muttering to herself,
LINE 19: kept looking round toward the drawing room door. It opened and Nicholas
LINE 20: came in.
LINE 21: "Sónya, what is the matter with you? How can you?" said he, running
LINE 22: up to her.
LINE 23: "It's nothing, nothing; leave me alone!" sobbed Sónya.
LINE 24: "Ah, I know what it is."
LINE 25: "Well, if you do, so much the better, and you can go back to her!"
LINE 26: "Só-o-onya! Look here! How can you torture me and yourself like that,
LINE 27: for a mere fancy?" said Nicholas taking her hand.
LINE 28: Sónya did not pull it away, and left off crying. Natásha, not stirring
LINE 29: and scarcely breathing, watched from her ambush with sparkling eyes.
LINE 30: "What will happen now?" thought she.
LINE 31: "Sónya! What is anyone in the world to me? You alone are
LINE 32: everything!" said Nicholas. "And I will prove it to you."
LINE 33: "I don't like you to talk like that."
LINE 34: "Well, then, I won't; only forgive me, Sónya!" He drew her to him
LINE 35: and kissed her.
LINE 36: "Oh, how nice," thought Natásha; and when Sónya and Nicholas had
LINE 37: gone out of the conservatory she followed and called Borís to her.
LINE 38: "Borís, come here," said she with a sly and significant look. "I
LINE 39: have something to tell you. Here, here!" and she led him into the
LINE 40: conservatory to the place among the tubs where she had been hiding.
LINE 41: Borís followed her, smiling.
LINE 42: "What is the something?" asked he.
LINE 43: She grew confused, glanced round, and, seeing the doll she had thrown
LINE 44: down on one of the tubs, picked it up.
LINE 45: "Kiss the doll," said she.
LINE 46: Borís looked attentively and kindly at her eager face, but did not
LINE 47: reply.
LINE 48: "Don't you want to? Well, then, come here," said she, and
LINE 49: went further in among the plants and threw down the doll. "Closer,
LINE 50: closer!" she whispered.
LINE 51: She caught the young officer by his cuffs, and a look of solemnity and
LINE 52: fear appeared on her flushed face.
LINE 53: "And me? Would you like to kiss me?" she whispered almost inaudibly,
LINE 54: glancing up at him from under her brows, smiling, and almost crying from
LINE 55: excitement.
LINE 56: Borís blushed.
LINE 57: "How funny you are!" he said, bending down to her and blushing still
LINE 58: more, but he waited and did nothing.
LINE 59: Suddenly she jumped up onto a tub to be higher than he, embraced him so
LINE 60: that both her slender bare arms clasped him above his neck, and, tossing
LINE 61: back her hair, kissed him full on the lips.
LINE 62: Then she slipped down among the flowerpots on the other side of the tubs
LINE 63: and stood, hanging her head.
LINE 64: "Natásha," he said, "you know that I love you, but...."
LINE 65: "You are in love with me?" Natásha broke in.
LINE 66: "Yes, I am, but please don't let us do like that.... In another four
LINE 67: years ... then I will ask for your hand."
LINE 68: Natásha considered.
LINE 69: "Thirteen, fourteen, fifteen, sixteen," she counted on her slender
LINE 70: little fingers. "All right! Then it's settled?"
LINE 71: A smile of joy and satisfaction lit up her eager face.
LINE 72: "Settled!" replied Borís.
LINE 73: "Forever?" said the little girl. "Till death itself?"
LINE 74: She took his arm and with a happy face went with him into the adjoining
LINE 75: sitting room.