LINE 1: At the appointed hour the prince, powdered and shaven, entered the
LINE 2: dining room where his daughter-in-law, Princess Mary, and Mademoiselle
LINE 3: Bourienne were already awaiting him together with his architect, who by
LINE 4: a strange caprice of his employer's was admitted to table though the
LINE 5: position of that insignificant individual was such as could certainly
LINE 6: not have caused him to expect that honor. The prince, who generally kept
LINE 7: very strictly to social distinctions and rarely admitted even important
LINE 8: government officials to his table, had unexpectedly selected Michael
LINE 9: Ivánovich (who always went into a corner to blow his nose on his
LINE 10: checked handkerchief) to illustrate the theory that all men are equals,
LINE 11: and had more than once impressed on his daughter that Michael Ivánovich
LINE 12: was "not a whit worse than you or I." At dinner the prince usually
LINE 13: spoke to the taciturn Michael Ivánovich more often than to anyone else.
LINE 14: In the dining room, which like all the rooms in the house was
LINE 15: exceedingly lofty, the members of the household and the footmen—one
LINE 16: behind each chair—stood waiting for the prince to enter. The head
LINE 17: butler, napkin on arm, was scanning the setting of the table, making
LINE 18: signs to the footmen, and anxiously glancing from the clock to the door
LINE 19: by which the prince was to enter. Prince Andrew was looking at a large
LINE 20: gilt frame, new to him, containing the genealogical tree of the Princes
LINE 21: Bolkónski, opposite which hung another such frame with a badly painted
LINE 22: portrait (evidently by the hand of the artist belonging to the estate)
LINE 23: of a ruling prince, in a crown—an alleged descendant of Rúrik and
LINE 24: ancestor of the Bolkónskis. Prince Andrew, looking again at that
LINE 25: genealogical tree, shook his head, laughing as a man laughs who looks at
LINE 26: a portrait so characteristic of the original as to be amusing.
LINE 27: "How thoroughly like him that is!" he said to Princess Mary, who had
LINE 28: come up to him.
LINE 29: Princess Mary looked at her brother in surprise. She did not understand
LINE 30: what he was laughing at. Everything her father did inspired her with
LINE 31: reverence and was beyond question.
LINE 32: "Everyone has his Achilles' heel," continued Prince Andrew.
LINE 33: "Fancy, with his powerful mind, indulging in such nonsense!"
LINE 34: Princess Mary could not understand the boldness of her brother's
LINE 35: criticism and was about to reply, when the expected footsteps were heard
LINE 36: coming from the study. The prince walked in quickly and jauntily as was
LINE 37: his wont, as if intentionally contrasting the briskness of his manners
LINE 38: with the strict formality of his house. At that moment the great clock
LINE 39: struck two and another with a shrill tone joined in from the drawing
LINE 40: room. The prince stood still; his lively glittering eyes from under
LINE 41: their thick, bushy eyebrows sternly scanned all present and rested on
LINE 42: the little princess. She felt, as courtiers do when the Tsar enters, the
LINE 43: sensation of fear and respect which the old man inspired in all around
LINE 44: him. He stroked her hair and then patted her awkwardly on the back of
LINE 45: her neck.
LINE 46: "I'm glad, glad, to see you," he said, looking attentively into
LINE 47: her eyes, and then quickly went to his place and sat down. "Sit down,
LINE 48: sit down! Sit down, Michael Ivánovich!"
LINE 49: He indicated a place beside him to his daughter-in-law. A footman moved
LINE 50: the chair for her.
LINE 51: "Ho, ho!" said the old man, casting his eyes on her rounded figure.
LINE 52: "You've been in a hurry. That's bad!"
LINE 53: He laughed in his usual dry, cold, unpleasant way, with his lips only
LINE 54: and not with his eyes.
LINE 55: "You must walk, walk as much as possible, as much as possible," he
LINE 56: said.
LINE 57: The little princess did not, or did not wish to, hear his words. She was
LINE 58: silent and seemed confused. The prince asked her about her father, and
LINE 59: she began to smile and talk. He asked about mutual acquaintances, and
LINE 60: she became still more animated and chattered away giving him greetings
LINE 61: from various people and retelling the town gossip.
LINE 62: "Countess Apráksina, poor thing, has lost her husband and she has
LINE 63: cried her eyes out," she said, growing more and more lively.
LINE 64: As she became animated the prince looked at her more and more sternly,
LINE 65: and suddenly, as if he had studied her sufficiently and had formed a
LINE 66: definite idea of her, he turned away and addressed Michael Ivánovich.
LINE 67: "Well, Michael Ivánovich, our Bonaparte will be having a bad time
LINE 68: of it. Prince Andrew" (he always spoke thus of his son) "has been
LINE 69: telling me what forces are being collected against him! While you and I
LINE 70: never thought much of him."
LINE 71: Michael Ivánovich did not at all know when "you and I" had said
LINE 72: such things about Bonaparte, but understanding that he was wanted as
LINE 73: a peg on which to hang the prince's favorite topic, he looked
LINE 74: inquiringly at the young prince, wondering what would follow.
LINE 75: "He is a great tactician!" said the prince to his son, pointing to
LINE 76: the architect.
LINE 77: And the conversation again turned on the war, on Bonaparte, and the
LINE 78: generals and statesmen of the day. The old prince seemed convinced not
LINE 79: only that all the men of the day were mere babies who did not know the
LINE 80: A B C of war or of politics, and that Bonaparte was an insignificant
LINE 81: little Frenchy, successful only because there were no longer any
LINE 82: Potëmkins or Suvórovs left to oppose him; but he was also convinced
LINE 83: that there were no political difficulties in Europe and no real war,
LINE 84: but only a sort of puppet show at which the men of the day were playing,
LINE 85: pretending to do something real. Prince Andrew gaily bore with his
LINE 86: father's ridicule of the new men, and drew him on and listened to him
LINE 87: with evident pleasure.
LINE 88: "The past always seems good," said he, "but did not Suvórov
LINE 89: himself fall into a trap Moreau set him, and from which he did not know
LINE 90: how to escape?"
LINE 91: "Who told you that? Who?" cried the prince. "Suvórov!" And he
LINE 92: jerked away his plate, which Tíkhon briskly caught. "Suvórov!...
LINE 93: Consider, Prince Andrew. Two... Frederick and Suvórov; Moreau!...
LINE 94: Moreau would have been a prisoner if Suvórov had had a free hand; but
LINE 95: he had the Hofs-kriegs-wurst-schnapps-Rath on his hands. It would have
LINE 96: puzzled the devil himself! When you get there you'll find out what
LINE 97: those Hofs-kriegs-wurst-Raths are! Suvórov couldn't manage them so
LINE 98: what chance has Michael Kutúzov? No, my dear boy," he continued,
LINE 99: "you and your generals won't get on against Buonaparte; you'll
LINE 100: have to call in the French, so that birds of a feather may fight
LINE 101: together. The German, Pahlen, has been sent to New York in America, to
LINE 102: fetch the Frenchman, Moreau," he said, alluding to the invitation made
LINE 103: that year to Moreau to enter the Russian service.... "Wonderful!...
LINE 104: Were the Potëmkins, Suvórovs, and Orlóvs Germans? No, lad, either you
LINE 105: fellows have all lost your wits, or I have outlived mine. May God help
LINE 106: you, but we'll see what will happen. Buonaparte has become a great
LINE 107: commander among them! Hm!..."
LINE 108: "I don't at all say that all the plans are good," said Prince
LINE 109: Andrew, "I am only surprised at your opinion of Bonaparte. You
LINE 110: may laugh as much as you like, but all the same Bonaparte is a great
LINE 111: general!"
LINE 112: "Michael Ivánovich!" cried the old prince to the architect who,
LINE 113: busy with his roast meat, hoped he had been forgotten: "Didn't
LINE 114: I tell you Buonaparte was a great tactician? Here, he says the same
LINE 115: thing."
LINE 116: "To be sure, your excellency," replied the architect.
LINE 117: The prince again laughed his frigid laugh.
LINE 118: "Buonaparte was born with a silver spoon in his mouth. He has got
LINE 119: splendid soldiers. Besides he began by attacking Germans. And only
LINE 120: idlers have failed to beat the Germans. Since the world began everybody
LINE 121: has beaten the Germans. They beat no one—except one another. He made
LINE 122: his reputation fighting them."
LINE 123: And the prince began explaining all the blunders which, according to
LINE 124: him, Bonaparte had made in his campaigns and even in politics. His
LINE 125: son made no rejoinder, but it was evident that whatever arguments were
LINE 126: presented he was as little able as his father to change his opinion. He
LINE 127: listened, refraining from a reply, and involuntarily wondered how this
LINE 128: old man, living alone in the country for so many years, could know and
LINE 129: discuss so minutely and acutely all the recent European military and
LINE 130: political events.
LINE 131: "You think I'm an old man and don't understand the present state
LINE 132: of affairs?" concluded his father. "But it troubles me. I don't
LINE 133: sleep at night. Come now, where has this great commander of yours shown
LINE 134: his skill?" he concluded.
LINE 135: "That would take too long to tell," answered the son.
LINE 136: "Well, then go off to your Buonaparte! Mademoiselle Bourienne,
LINE 137: here's another admirer of that powder-monkey emperor of yours," he
LINE 138: exclaimed in excellent French.
LINE 139: "You know, Prince, I am not a Bonapartist!"
LINE 140: "Dieu sait quand reviendra." hummed the prince out of tune and, with
LINE 141: a laugh still more so, he quitted the table.
LINE 142: The little princess during the whole discussion and the rest of
LINE 143: the dinner sat silent, glancing with a frightened look now at her
LINE 144: father-in-law and now at Princess Mary. When they left the table she
LINE 145: took her sister-in-law's arm and drew her into another room.
LINE 146: "What a clever man your father is," said she; "perhaps that is why
LINE 147: I am afraid of him."
LINE 148: "Oh, he is so kind!" answered Princess Mary.