LINE 1: Just then another visitor entered the drawing room: Prince Andrew
LINE 2: Bolkónski, the little princess' husband. He was a very handsome young
LINE 3: man, of medium height, with firm, clearcut features. Everything about
LINE 4: him, from his weary, bored expression to his quiet, measured step,
LINE 5: offered a most striking contrast to his quiet, little wife. It was
LINE 6: evident that he not only knew everyone in the drawing room, but had
LINE 7: found them to be so tiresome that it wearied him to look at or listen to
LINE 8: them. And among all these faces that he found so tedious, none seemed
LINE 9: to bore him so much as that of his pretty wife. He turned away from
LINE 10: her with a grimace that distorted his handsome face, kissed Anna
LINE 11: Pávlovna's hand, and screwing up his eyes scanned the whole company.
LINE 12: "You are off to the war, Prince?" said Anna Pávlovna.
LINE 13: "General Kutúzov," said Bolkónski, speaking French and stressing
LINE 14: the last syllable of the general's name like a Frenchman, "has been
LINE 15: pleased to take me as an aide-de-camp...."
LINE 16: "And Lise, your wife?"
LINE 17: "She will go to the country."
LINE 18: "Are you not ashamed to deprive us of your charming wife?"
LINE 19: "André," said his wife, addressing her husband in the same
LINE 20: coquettish manner in which she spoke to other men, "the vicomte has
LINE 21: been telling us such a tale about Mademoiselle George and Buonaparte!"
LINE 22: Prince Andrew screwed up his eyes and turned away. Pierre, who from
LINE 23: the moment Prince Andrew entered the room had watched him with glad,
LINE 24: affectionate eyes, now came up and took his arm. Before he looked round
LINE 25: Prince Andrew frowned again, expressing his annoyance with whoever was
LINE 26: touching his arm, but when he saw Pierre's beaming face he gave him an
LINE 27: unexpectedly kind and pleasant smile.
LINE 28: "There now!... So you, too, are in the great world?" said he to
LINE 29: Pierre.
LINE 30: "I knew you would be here," replied Pierre. "I will come to supper
LINE 31: with you. May I?" he added in a low voice so as not to disturb the
LINE 32: vicomte who was continuing his story.
LINE 33: "No, impossible!" said Prince Andrew, laughing and pressing
LINE 34: Pierre's hand to show that there was no need to ask the question. He
LINE 35: wished to say something more, but at that moment Prince Vasíli and his
LINE 36: daughter got up to go and the two young men rose to let them pass.
LINE 37: "You must excuse me, dear Vicomte," said Prince Vasíli to the
LINE 38: Frenchman, holding him down by the sleeve in a friendly way to prevent
LINE 39: his rising. "This unfortunate fete at the ambassador's deprives me
LINE 40: of a pleasure, and obliges me to interrupt you. I am very sorry to leave
LINE 41: your enchanting party," said he, turning to Anna Pávlovna.
LINE 42: His daughter, Princess Hélène, passed between the chairs, lightly
LINE 43: holding up the folds of her dress, and the smile shone still more
LINE 44: radiantly on her beautiful face. Pierre gazed at her with rapturous,
LINE 45: almost frightened, eyes as she passed him.
LINE 46: "Very lovely," said Prince Andrew.
LINE 47: "Very," said Pierre.
LINE 48: In passing Prince Vasíli seized Pierre's hand and said to Anna
LINE 49: Pávlovna: "Educate this bear for me! He has been staying with me
LINE 50: a whole month and this is the first time I have seen him in society.
LINE 51: Nothing is so necessary for a young man as the society of clever
LINE 52: women."
LINE 53: Anna Pávlovna smiled and promised to take Pierre in hand. She knew his
LINE 54: father to be a connection of Prince Vasíli's. The elderly lady who
LINE 55: had been sitting with the old aunt rose hurriedly and overtook Prince
LINE 56: Vasíli in the anteroom. All the affectation of interest she had assumed
LINE 57: had left her kindly and tear-worn face and it now expressed only anxiety
LINE 58: and fear.
LINE 59: "How about my son Borís, Prince?" said she, hurrying after him into
LINE 60: the anteroom. "I can't remain any longer in Petersburg. Tell me what
LINE 61: news I may take back to my poor boy."
LINE 62: Although Prince Vasíli listened reluctantly and not very politely
LINE 63: to the elderly lady, even betraying some impatience, she gave him an
LINE 64: ingratiating and appealing smile, and took his hand that he might not go
LINE 65: away.
LINE 66: "What would it cost you to say a word to the Emperor, and then he
LINE 67: would be transferred to the Guards at once?" said she.
LINE 68: "Believe me, Princess, I am ready to do all I can," answered Prince
LINE 69: Vasíli, "but it is difficult for me to ask the Emperor. I should
LINE 70: advise you to appeal to Rumyántsev through Prince Golítsyn. That would
LINE 71: be the best way."
LINE 72: The elderly lady was a Princess Drubetskáya, belonging to one of the
LINE 73: best families in Russia, but she was poor, and having long been out of
LINE 74: society had lost her former influential connections. She had now come to
LINE 75: Petersburg to procure an appointment in the Guards for her only son.
LINE 76: It was, in fact, solely to meet Prince Vasíli that she had obtained an
LINE 77: invitation to Anna Pávlovna's reception and had sat listening to
LINE 78: the vicomte's story. Prince Vasíli's words frightened her, an
LINE 79: embittered look clouded her once handsome face, but only for a moment;
LINE 80: then she smiled again and clutched Prince Vasíli's arm more tightly.
LINE 81: "Listen to me, Prince," said she. "I have never yet asked you
LINE 82: for anything and I never will again, nor have I ever reminded you of my
LINE 83: father's friendship for you; but now I entreat you for God's sake to
LINE 84: do this for my son—and I shall always regard you as a benefactor,"
LINE 85: she added hurriedly. "No, don't be angry, but promise! I have asked
LINE 86: Golítsyn and he has refused. Be the kindhearted man you always were,"
LINE 87: she said, trying to smile though tears were in her eyes.
LINE 88: "Papa, we shall be late," said Princess Hélène, turning her
LINE 89: beautiful head and looking over her classically molded shoulder as she
LINE 90: stood waiting by the door.
LINE 91: Influence in society, however, is a capital which has to be economized
LINE 92: if it is to last. Prince Vasíli knew this, and having once realized
LINE 93: that if he asked on behalf of all who begged of him, he would soon be
LINE 94: unable to ask for himself, he became chary of using his influence. But
LINE 95: in Princess Drubetskáya's case he felt, after her second appeal,
LINE 96: something like qualms of conscience. She had reminded him of what was
LINE 97: quite true; he had been indebted to her father for the first steps in
LINE 98: his career. Moreover, he could see by her manners that she was one of
LINE 99: those women—mostly mothers—who, having once made up their minds,
LINE 100: will not rest until they have gained their end, and are prepared if
LINE 101: necessary to go on insisting day after day and hour after hour, and even
LINE 102: to make scenes. This last consideration moved him.
LINE 103: "My dear Anna Mikháylovna," said he with his usual familiarity and
LINE 104: weariness of tone, "it is almost impossible for me to do what you
LINE 105: ask; but to prove my devotion to you and how I respect your father's
LINE 106: memory, I will do the impossible—your son shall be transferred to the
LINE 107: Guards. Here is my hand on it. Are you satisfied?"
LINE 108: "My dear benefactor! This is what I expected from you—I knew your
LINE 109: kindness!" He turned to go.
LINE 110: "Wait—just a word! When he has been transferred to the Guards..."
LINE 111: she faltered. "You are on good terms with Michael Ilariónovich
LINE 112: Kutúzov ... recommend Borís to him as adjutant! Then I shall be at
LINE 113: rest, and then..."
LINE 114: Prince Vasíli smiled.
LINE 115: "No, I won't promise that. You don't know how Kutúzov is pestered
LINE 116: since his appointment as Commander in Chief. He told me himself that
LINE 117: all the Moscow ladies have conspired to give him all their sons as
LINE 118: adjutants."
LINE 119: "No, but do promise! I won't let you go! My dear benefactor..."
LINE 120: "Papa," said his beautiful daughter in the same tone as before,
LINE 121: "we shall be late."
LINE 122: "Well, au revoir! Good-by! You hear her?"
LINE 123: "Then tomorrow you will speak to the Emperor?"
LINE 124: "Certainly; but about Kutúzov, I don't promise."
LINE 125: "Do promise, do promise, Vasíli!" cried Anna Mikháylovna as he
LINE 126: went, with the smile of a coquettish girl, which at one time probably
LINE 127: came naturally to her, but was now very ill-suited to her careworn face.
LINE 128: Apparently she had forgotten her age and by force of habit employed
LINE 129: all the old feminine arts. But as soon as the prince had gone her face
LINE 130: resumed its former cold, artificial expression. She returned to the
LINE 131: group where the vicomte was still talking, and again pretended to
LINE 132: listen, while waiting till it would be time to leave. Her task was
LINE 133: accomplished.