LINE 1: The rustle of a woman's dress was heard in the next room. Prince
LINE 2: Andrew shook himself as if waking up, and his face assumed the look it
LINE 3: had had in Anna Pávlovna's drawing room. Pierre removed his feet from
LINE 4: the sofa. The princess came in. She had changed her gown for a house
LINE 5: dress as fresh and elegant as the other. Prince Andrew rose and politely
LINE 6: placed a chair for her.
LINE 7: "How is it," she began, as usual in French, settling down briskly
LINE 8: and fussily in the easy chair, "how is it Annette never got married?
LINE 9: How stupid you men all are not to have married her! Excuse me for saying
LINE 10: so, but you have no sense about women. What an argumentative fellow you
LINE 11: are, Monsieur Pierre!"
LINE 12: "And I am still arguing with your husband. I can't understand why he
LINE 13: wants to go to the war," replied Pierre, addressing the princess
LINE 14: with none of the embarrassment so commonly shown by young men in their
LINE 15: intercourse with young women.
LINE 16: The princess started. Evidently Pierre's words touched her to the
LINE 17: quick.
LINE 18: "Ah, that is just what I tell him!" said she. "I don't
LINE 19: understand it; I don't in the least understand why men can't live
LINE 20: without wars. How is it that we women don't want anything of the kind,
LINE 21: don't need it? Now you shall judge between us. I always tell him: Here
LINE 22: he is Uncle's aide-de-camp, a most brilliant position. He is so
LINE 23: well known, so much appreciated by everyone. The other day at the
LINE 24: Apráksins' I heard a lady asking, 'Is that the famous Prince
LINE 25: Andrew?' I did indeed." She laughed. "He is so well received
LINE 26: everywhere. He might easily become aide-de-camp to the Emperor. You know
LINE 27: the Emperor spoke to him most graciously. Annette and I were speaking of
LINE 28: how to arrange it. What do you think?"
LINE 29: Pierre looked at his friend and, noticing that he did not like the
LINE 30: conversation, gave no reply.
LINE 31: "When are you starting?" he asked.
LINE 32: "Oh, don't speak of his going, don't! I won't hear it spoken
LINE 33: of," said the princess in the same petulantly playful tone in which
LINE 34: she had spoken to Hippolyte in the drawing room and which was so plainly
LINE 35: ill-suited to the family circle of which Pierre was almost a member.
LINE 36: "Today when I remembered that all these delightful associations
LINE 37: must be broken off ... and then you know, André..." (she looked
LINE 38: significantly at her husband) "I'm afraid, I'm afraid!" she
LINE 39: whispered, and a shudder ran down her back.
LINE 40: Her husband looked at her as if surprised to notice that someone besides
LINE 41: Pierre and himself was in the room, and addressed her in a tone of
LINE 42: frigid politeness.
LINE 43: "What is it you are afraid of, Lise? I don't understand," said he.
LINE 44: "There, what egotists men all are: all, all egotists! Just for a whim
LINE 45: of his own, goodness only knows why, he leaves me and locks me up alone
LINE 46: in the country."
LINE 47: "With my father and sister, remember," said Prince Andrew gently.
LINE 48: "Alone all the same, without my friends.... And he expects me not to
LINE 49: be afraid."
LINE 50: Her tone was now querulous and her lip drawn up, giving her not a
LINE 51: joyful, but an animal, squirrel-like expression. She paused as if she
LINE 52: felt it indecorous to speak of her pregnancy before Pierre, though the
LINE 53: gist of the matter lay in that.
LINE 54: "I still can't understand what you are afraid of," said Prince
LINE 55: Andrew slowly, not taking his eyes off his wife.
LINE 56: The princess blushed, and raised her arms with a gesture of despair.
LINE 57: "No, Andrew, I must say you have changed. Oh, how you have...."
LINE 58: "Your doctor tells you to go to bed earlier," said Prince Andrew.
LINE 59: "You had better go."
LINE 60: The princess said nothing, but suddenly her short downy lip quivered.
LINE 61: Prince Andrew rose, shrugged his shoulders, and walked about the room.
LINE 62: Pierre looked over his spectacles with naïve surprise, now at him and
LINE 63: now at her, moved as if about to rise too, but changed his mind.
LINE 64: "Why should I mind Monsieur Pierre being here?" exclaimed the little
LINE 65: princess suddenly, her pretty face all at once distorted by a tearful
LINE 66: grimace. "I have long wanted to ask you, Andrew, why you have changed
LINE 67: so to me? What have I done to you? You are going to the war and have no
LINE 68: pity for me. Why is it?"
LINE 69: "Lise!" was all Prince Andrew said. But that one word expressed
LINE 70: an entreaty, a threat, and above all conviction that she would herself
LINE 71: regret her words. But she went on hurriedly:
LINE 72: "You treat me like an invalid or a child. I see it all! Did you behave
LINE 73: like that six months ago?"
LINE 74: "Lise, I beg you to desist," said Prince Andrew still more
LINE 75: emphatically.
LINE 76: Pierre, who had been growing more and more agitated as he listened to
LINE 77: all this, rose and approached the princess. He seemed unable to bear the
LINE 78: sight of tears and was ready to cry himself.
LINE 79: "Calm yourself, Princess! It seems so to you because.... I assure you
LINE 80: I myself have experienced ... and so ... because ... No, excuse me!
LINE 81: An outsider is out of place here.... No, don't distress yourself....
LINE 82: Good-by!"
LINE 83: Prince Andrew caught him by the hand.
LINE 84: "No, wait, Pierre! The princess is too kind to wish to deprive me of
LINE 85: the pleasure of spending the evening with you."
LINE 86: "No, he thinks only of himself," muttered the princess without
LINE 87: restraining her angry tears.
LINE 88: "Lise!" said Prince Andrew dryly, raising his voice to the pitch
LINE 89: which indicates that patience is exhausted.
LINE 90: Suddenly the angry, squirrel-like expression of the princess' pretty
LINE 91: face changed into a winning and piteous look of fear. Her beautiful eyes
LINE 92: glanced askance at her husband's face, and her own assumed the timid,
LINE 93: deprecating expression of a dog when it rapidly but feebly wags its
LINE 94: drooping tail.
LINE 95: "Mon Dieu, mon Dieu!" she muttered, and lifting her dress with one
LINE 96: hand she went up to her husband and kissed him on the forehead.
LINE 97: "Good night, Lise," said he, rising and courteously kissing her hand
LINE 98: as he would have done to a stranger.