LINE 1: Anna Pávlovna's drawing room was gradually filling. The highest
LINE 2: Petersburg society was assembled there: people differing widely in age
LINE 3: and character but alike in the social circle to which they belonged.
LINE 4: Prince Vasíli's daughter, the beautiful Hélène, came to take her
LINE 5: father to the ambassador's entertainment; she wore a ball dress and
LINE 6: her badge as maid of honor. The youthful little Princess Bolkónskaya,
LINE 7: known as la femme la plus séduisante de Pétersbourg, * was also there.
LINE 8: She had been married during the previous winter, and being pregnant did
LINE 9: not go to any large gatherings, but only to small receptions. Prince
LINE 10: Vasíli's son, Hippolyte, had come with Mortemart, whom he introduced.
LINE 11: The Abbé Morio and many others had also come.
LINE 12: * The most fascinating woman in Petersburg.
LINE 13: To each new arrival Anna Pávlovna said, "You have not yet seen my
LINE 14: aunt," or "You do not know my aunt?" and very gravely conducted
LINE 15: him or her to a little old lady, wearing large bows of ribbon in her
LINE 16: cap, who had come sailing in from another room as soon as the guests
LINE 17: began to arrive; and slowly turning her eyes from the visitor to her
LINE 18: aunt, Anna Pávlovna mentioned each one's name and then left them.
LINE 19: Each visitor performed the ceremony of greeting this old aunt whom not
LINE 20: one of them knew, not one of them wanted to know, and not one of them
LINE 21: cared about; Anna Pávlovna observed these greetings with mournful and
LINE 22: solemn interest and silent approval. The aunt spoke to each of them in
LINE 23: the same words, about their health and her own, and the health of Her
LINE 24: Majesty, "who, thank God, was better today." And each visitor,
LINE 25: though politeness prevented his showing impatience, left the old woman
LINE 26: with a sense of relief at having performed a vexatious duty and did not
LINE 27: return to her the whole evening.
LINE 28: The young Princess Bolkónskaya had brought some work in a
LINE 29: gold-embroidered velvet bag. Her pretty little upper lip, on which a
LINE 30: delicate dark down was just perceptible, was too short for her teeth,
LINE 31: but it lifted all the more sweetly, and was especially charming when she
LINE 32: occasionally drew it down to meet the lower lip. As is always the case
LINE 33: with a thoroughly attractive woman, her defect—the shortness of her
LINE 34: upper lip and her half-open mouth—seemed to be her own special and
LINE 35: peculiar form of beauty. Everyone brightened at the sight of this pretty
LINE 36: young woman, so soon to become a mother, so full of life and health, and
LINE 37: carrying her burden so lightly. Old men and dull dispirited young ones
LINE 38: who looked at her, after being in her company and talking to her a
LINE 39: little while, felt as if they too were becoming, like her, full of life
LINE 40: and health. All who talked to her, and at each word saw her bright smile
LINE 41: and the constant gleam of her white teeth, thought that they were in a
LINE 42: specially amiable mood that day.
LINE 43: The little princess went round the table with quick, short, swaying
LINE 44: steps, her workbag on her arm, and gaily spreading out her dress sat
LINE 45: down on a sofa near the silver samovar, as if all she was doing was a
LINE 46: pleasure to herself and to all around her. "I have brought my work,"
LINE 47: said she in French, displaying her bag and addressing all present.
LINE 48: "Mind, Annette, I hope you have not played a wicked trick on me,"
LINE 49: she added, turning to her hostess. "You wrote that it was to be quite
LINE 50: a small reception, and just see how badly I am dressed." And she
LINE 51: spread out her arms to show her short-waisted, lace-trimmed, dainty gray
LINE 52: dress, girdled with a broad ribbon just below the breast.
LINE 53: "Soyez tranquille, Lise, you will always be prettier than anyone
LINE 54: else," replied Anna Pávlovna.
LINE 55: "You know," said the princess in the same tone of voice and still in
LINE 56: French, turning to a general, "my husband is deserting me? He is going
LINE 57: to get himself killed. Tell me what this wretched war is for?" she
LINE 58: added, addressing Prince Vasíli, and without waiting for an answer she
LINE 59: turned to speak to his daughter, the beautiful Hélène.
LINE 60: "What a delightful woman this little princess is!" said Prince
LINE 61: Vasíli to Anna Pávlovna.
LINE 62: One of the next arrivals was a stout, heavily built young man with
LINE 63: close-cropped hair, spectacles, the light-colored breeches fashionable
LINE 64: at that time, a very high ruffle, and a brown dress coat. This stout
LINE 65: young man was an illegitimate son of Count Bezúkhov, a well-known
LINE 66: grandee of Catherine's time who now lay dying in Moscow. The young man
LINE 67: had not yet entered either the military or civil service, as he had only
LINE 68: just returned from abroad where he had been educated, and this was his
LINE 69: first appearance in society. Anna Pávlovna greeted him with the nod she
LINE 70: accorded to the lowest hierarchy in her drawing room. But in spite of
LINE 71: this lowest-grade greeting, a look of anxiety and fear, as at the sight
LINE 72: of something too large and unsuited to the place, came over her face
LINE 73: when she saw Pierre enter. Though he was certainly rather bigger than
LINE 74: the other men in the room, her anxiety could only have reference to
LINE 75: the clever though shy, but observant and natural, expression which
LINE 76: distinguished him from everyone else in that drawing room.
LINE 77: "It is very good of you, Monsieur Pierre, to come and visit a poor
LINE 78: invalid," said Anna Pávlovna, exchanging an alarmed glance with her
LINE 79: aunt as she conducted him to her.
LINE 80: Pierre murmured something unintelligible, and continued to look round as
LINE 81: if in search of something. On his way to the aunt he bowed to the little
LINE 82: princess with a pleased smile, as to an intimate acquaintance.
LINE 83: Anna Pávlovna's alarm was justified, for Pierre turned away from the
LINE 84: aunt without waiting to hear her speech about Her Majesty's health.
LINE 85: Anna Pávlovna in dismay detained him with the words: "Do you know the
LINE 86: Abbé Morio? He is a most interesting man."
LINE 87: "Yes, I have heard of his scheme for perpetual peace, and it is very
LINE 88: interesting but hardly feasible."
LINE 89: "You think so?" rejoined Anna Pávlovna in order to say something
LINE 90: and get away to attend to her duties as hostess. But Pierre now
LINE 91: committed a reverse act of impoliteness. First he had left a lady before
LINE 92: she had finished speaking to him, and now he continued to speak to
LINE 93: another who wished to get away. With his head bent, and his big feet
LINE 94: spread apart, he began explaining his reasons for thinking the abbé's
LINE 95: plan chimerical.
LINE 96: "We will talk of it later," said Anna Pávlovna with a smile.
LINE 97: And having got rid of this young man who did not know how to behave, she
LINE 98: resumed her duties as hostess and continued to listen and watch, ready
LINE 99: to help at any point where the conversation might happen to flag. As
LINE 100: the foreman of a spinning mill, when he has set the hands to work, goes
LINE 101: round and notices here a spindle that has stopped or there one that
LINE 102: creaks or makes more noise than it should, and hastens to check the
LINE 103: machine or set it in proper motion, so Anna Pávlovna moved about her
LINE 104: drawing room, approaching now a silent, now a too-noisy group, and by a
LINE 105: word or slight rearrangement kept the conversational machine in steady,
LINE 106: proper, and regular motion. But amid these cares her anxiety about
LINE 107: Pierre was evident. She kept an anxious watch on him when he approached
LINE 108: the group round Mortemart to listen to what was being said there, and
LINE 109: again when he passed to another group whose center was the abbé.
LINE 110: Pierre had been educated abroad, and this reception at Anna
LINE 111: Pávlovna's was the first he had attended in Russia. He knew that all
LINE 112: the intellectual lights of Petersburg were gathered there and, like a
LINE 113: child in a toyshop, did not know which way to look, afraid of missing
LINE 114: any clever conversation that was to be heard. Seeing the self-confident
LINE 115: and refined expression on the faces of those present he was always
LINE 116: expecting to hear something very profound. At last he came up to Morio.
LINE 117: Here the conversation seemed interesting and he stood waiting for an
LINE 118: opportunity to express his own views, as young people are fond of doing.