LINE 1: The only young people remaining in the drawing room, not counting the
LINE 2: young lady visitor and the countess' eldest daughter (who was four
LINE 3: years older than her sister and behaved already like a grown-up person),
LINE 4: were Nicholas and Sónya, the niece. Sónya was a slender little
LINE 5: brunette with a tender look in her eyes which were veiled by long
LINE 6: lashes, thick black plaits coiling twice round her head, and a tawny
LINE 7: tint in her complexion and especially in the color of her slender but
LINE 8: graceful and muscular arms and neck. By the grace of her movements,
LINE 9: by the softness and flexibility of her small limbs, and by a certain
LINE 10: coyness and reserve of manner, she reminded one of a pretty, half-grown
LINE 11: kitten which promises to become a beautiful little cat. She evidently
LINE 12: considered it proper to show an interest in the general conversation by
LINE 13: smiling, but in spite of herself her eyes under their thick long lashes
LINE 14: watched her cousin who was going to join the army, with such passionate
LINE 15: girlish adoration that her smile could not for a single instant impose
LINE 16: upon anyone, and it was clear that the kitten had settled down only to
LINE 17: spring up with more energy and again play with her cousin as soon as
LINE 18: they too could, like Natásha and Borís, escape from the drawing room.
LINE 19: "Ah yes, my dear," said the count, addressing the visitor and
LINE 20: pointing to Nicholas, "his friend Borís has become an officer, and
LINE 21: so for friendship's sake he is leaving the university and me, his
LINE 22: old father, and entering the military service, my dear. And there was a
LINE 23: place and everything waiting for him in the Archives Department! Isn't
LINE 24: that friendship?" remarked the count in an inquiring tone.
LINE 25: "But they say that war has been declared," replied the visitor.
LINE 26: "They've been saying so a long while," said the count, "and
LINE 27: they'll say so again and again, and that will be the end of it. My
LINE 28: dear, there's friendship for you," he repeated. "He's joining
LINE 29: the hussars."
LINE 30: The visitor, not knowing what to say, shook her head.
LINE 31: "It's not at all from friendship," declared Nicholas, flaring
LINE 32: up and turning away as if from a shameful aspersion. "It is not from
LINE 33: friendship at all; I simply feel that the army is my vocation."
LINE 34: He glanced at his cousin and the young lady visitor; and they were both
LINE 35: regarding him with a smile of approbation.
LINE 36: "Schubert, the colonel of the Pávlograd Hussars, is dining with us
LINE 37: today. He has been here on leave and is taking Nicholas back with him.
LINE 38: It can't be helped!" said the count, shrugging his shoulders and
LINE 39: speaking playfully of a matter that evidently distressed him.
LINE 40: "I have already told you, Papa," said his son, "that if you
LINE 41: don't wish to let me go, I'll stay. But I know I am no use anywhere
LINE 42: except in the army; I am not a diplomat or a government clerk.—I
LINE 43: don't know how to hide what I feel." As he spoke he kept glancing
LINE 44: with the flirtatiousness of a handsome youth at Sónya and the young
LINE 45: lady visitor.
LINE 46: The little kitten, feasting her eyes on him, seemed ready at any moment
LINE 47: to start her gambols again and display her kittenish nature.
LINE 48: "All right, all right!" said the old count. "He always flares up!
LINE 49: This Buonaparte has turned all their heads; they all think of how he
LINE 50: rose from an ensign and became Emperor. Well, well, God grant it," he
LINE 51: added, not noticing his visitor's sarcastic smile.
LINE 52: The elders began talking about Bonaparte. Julie Karágina turned to
LINE 53: young Rostóv.
LINE 54: "What a pity you weren't at the Arkhárovs' on Thursday. It was so
LINE 55: dull without you," said she, giving him a tender smile.
LINE 56: The young man, flattered, sat down nearer to her with a coquettish
LINE 57: smile, and engaged the smiling Julie in a confidential conversation
LINE 58: without at all noticing that his involuntary smile had stabbed the heart
LINE 59: of Sónya, who blushed and smiled unnaturally. In the midst of his talk
LINE 60: he glanced round at her. She gave him a passionately angry glance, and
LINE 61: hardly able to restrain her tears and maintain the artificial smile
LINE 62: on her lips, she got up and left the room. All Nicholas' animation
LINE 63: vanished. He waited for the first pause in the conversation, and then
LINE 64: with a distressed face left the room to find Sónya.
LINE 65: "How plainly all these young people wear their hearts on their
LINE 66: sleeves!" said Anna Mikháylovna, pointing to Nicholas as he went out.
LINE 67: "Cousinage—dangereux voisinage," * she added.
LINE 68: * Cousinhood is a dangerous neighborhood.
LINE 69: "Yes," said the countess when the brightness these young people had
LINE 70: brought into the room had vanished; and as if answering a question no
LINE 71: one had put but which was always in her mind, "and how much suffering,
LINE 72: how much anxiety one has had to go through that we might rejoice in
LINE 73: them now! And yet really the anxiety is greater now than the joy. One is
LINE 74: always, always anxious! Especially just at this age, so dangerous both
LINE 75: for girls and boys."
LINE 76: "It all depends on the bringing up," remarked the visitor.
LINE 77: "Yes, you're quite right," continued the countess. "Till now I
LINE 78: have always, thank God, been my children's friend and had their full
LINE 79: confidence," said she, repeating the mistake of so many parents who
LINE 80: imagine that their children have no secrets from them. "I know I shall
LINE 81: always be my daughters' first confidante, and that if Nicholas, with
LINE 82: his impulsive nature, does get into mischief (a boy can't help it), he
LINE 83: will all the same never be like those Petersburg young men."
LINE 84: "Yes, they are splendid, splendid youngsters," chimed in the count,
LINE 85: who always solved questions that seemed to him perplexing by deciding
LINE 86: that everything was splendid. "Just fancy: wants to be an hussar.
LINE 87: What's one to do, my dear?"
LINE 88: "What a charming creature your younger girl is," said the visitor;
LINE 89: "a little volcano!"
LINE 90: "Yes, a regular volcano," said the count. "Takes after me! And
LINE 91: what a voice she has; though she's my daughter, I tell the truth
LINE 92: when I say she'll be a singer, a second Salomoni! We have engaged an
LINE 93: Italian to give her lessons."
LINE 94: "Isn't she too young? I have heard that it harms the voice to train
LINE 95: it at that age."
LINE 96: "Oh no, not at all too young!" replied the count. "Why, our
LINE 97: mothers used to be married at twelve or thirteen."
LINE 98: "And she's in love with Borís already. Just fancy!" said the
LINE 99: countess with a gentle smile, looking at Borís and went on, evidently
LINE 100: concerned with a thought that always occupied her: "Now you see if I
LINE 101: were to be severe with her and to forbid it ... goodness knows what they
LINE 102: might be up to on the sly" (she meant that they would be kissing),
LINE 103: "but as it is, I know every word she utters. She will come running to
LINE 104: me of her own accord in the evening and tell me everything. Perhaps I
LINE 105: spoil her, but really that seems the best plan. With her elder sister I
LINE 106: was stricter."
LINE 107: "Yes, I was brought up quite differently," remarked the handsome
LINE 108: elder daughter, Countess Véra, with a smile.
LINE 109: But the smile did not enhance Véra's beauty as smiles generally do;
LINE 110: on the contrary it gave her an unnatural, and therefore unpleasant,
LINE 111: expression. Véra was good-looking, not at all stupid, quick at
LINE 112: learning, was well brought up, and had a pleasant voice; what she said
LINE 113: was true and appropriate, yet, strange to say, everyone—the visitors
LINE 114: and countess alike—turned to look at her as if wondering why she had
LINE 115: said it, and they all felt awkward.
LINE 116: "People are always too clever with their eldest children and try to
LINE 117: make something exceptional of them," said the visitor.
LINE 118: "What's the good of denying it, my dear? Our dear countess was too
LINE 119: clever with Véra," said the count. "Well, what of that? She's
LINE 120: turned out splendidly all the same," he added, winking at Véra.
LINE 121: The guests got up and took their leave, promising to return to dinner.
LINE 122: "What manners! I thought they would never go," said the countess,
LINE 123: when she had seen her guests out.