LINE 1: Pierre well knew this large room divided by columns and an arch, its
LINE 2: walls hung round with Persian carpets. The part of the room behind the
LINE 3: columns, with a high silk-curtained mahogany bedstead on one side and
LINE 4: on the other an immense case containing icons, was brightly illuminated
LINE 5: with red light like a Russian church during evening service. Under
LINE 6: the gleaming icons stood a long invalid chair, and in that chair
LINE 7: on snowy-white smooth pillows, evidently freshly changed, Pierre
LINE 8: saw—covered to the waist by a bright green quilt—the familiar,
LINE 9: majestic figure of his father, Count Bezúkhov, with that gray mane of
LINE 10: hair above his broad forehead which reminded one of a lion, and the deep
LINE 11: characteristically noble wrinkles of his handsome, ruddy face. He lay
LINE 12: just under the icons; his large thick hands outside the quilt. Into the
LINE 13: right hand, which was lying palm downwards, a wax taper had been thrust
LINE 14: between forefinger and thumb, and an old servant, bending over from
LINE 15: behind the chair, held it in position. By the chair stood the priests,
LINE 16: their long hair falling over their magnificent glittering vestments,
LINE 17: with lighted tapers in their hands, slowly and solemnly conducting the
LINE 18: service. A little behind them stood the two younger princesses holding
LINE 19: handkerchiefs to their eyes, and just in front of them their eldest
LINE 20: sister, Catiche, with a vicious and determined look steadily fixed on
LINE 21: the icons, as though declaring to all that she could not answer for
LINE 22: herself should she glance round. Anna Mikháylovna, with a meek,
LINE 23: sorrowful, and all-forgiving expression on her face, stood by the door
LINE 24: near the strange lady. Prince Vasíli in front of the door, near the
LINE 25: invalid chair, a wax taper in his left hand, was leaning his left arm on
LINE 26: the carved back of a velvet chair he had turned round for the purpose,
LINE 27: and was crossing himself with his right hand, turning his eyes upward
LINE 28: each time he touched his forehead. His face wore a calm look of piety
LINE 29: and resignation to the will of God. "If you do not understand these
LINE 30: sentiments," he seemed to be saying, "so much the worse for you!"
LINE 31: Behind him stood the aide-de-camp, the doctors, and the menservants;
LINE 32: the men and women had separated as in church. All were silently crossing
LINE 33: themselves, and the reading of the church service, the subdued chanting
LINE 34: of deep bass voices, and in the intervals sighs and the shuffling of
LINE 35: feet were the only sounds that could be heard. Anna Mikháylovna, with
LINE 36: an air of importance that showed that she felt she quite knew what she
LINE 37: was about, went across the room to where Pierre was standing and gave
LINE 38: him a taper. He lit it and, distracted by observing those around him,
LINE 39: began crossing himself with the hand that held the taper.
LINE 40: Sophie, the rosy, laughter-loving, youngest princess with the mole,
LINE 41: watched him. She smiled, hid her face in her handkerchief, and remained
LINE 42: with it hidden for awhile; then looking up and seeing Pierre she
LINE 43: again began to laugh. She evidently felt unable to look at him
LINE 44: without laughing, but could not resist looking at him: so to be out of
LINE 45: temptation she slipped quietly behind one of the columns. In the midst
LINE 46: of the service the voices of the priests suddenly ceased, they whispered
LINE 47: to one another, and the old servant who was holding the count's hand
LINE 48: got up and said something to the ladies. Anna Mikháylovna stepped
LINE 49: forward and, stooping over the dying man, beckoned to Lorrain from
LINE 50: behind her back. The French doctor held no taper; he was leaning
LINE 51: against one of the columns in a respectful attitude implying that he,
LINE 52: a foreigner, in spite of all differences of faith, understood the full
LINE 53: importance of the rite now being performed and even approved of it. He
LINE 54: now approached the sick man with the noiseless step of one in full vigor
LINE 55: of life, with his delicate white fingers raised from the green quilt the
LINE 56: hand that was free, and turning sideways felt the pulse and reflected
LINE 57: a moment. The sick man was given something to drink, there was a
LINE 58: stir around him, then the people resumed their places and the service
LINE 59: continued. During this interval Pierre noticed that Prince Vasíli
LINE 60: left the chair on which he had been leaning, and—with an air
LINE 61: which intimated that he knew what he was about and if others did not
LINE 62: understand him it was so much the worse for them—did not go up to the
LINE 63: dying man, but passed by him, joined the eldest princess, and moved
LINE 64: with her to the side of the room where stood the high bedstead with its
LINE 65: silken hangings. On leaving the bed both Prince Vasíli and the princess
LINE 66: passed out by a back door, but returned to their places one after the
LINE 67: other before the service was concluded. Pierre paid no more attention
LINE 68: to this occurrence than to the rest of what went on, having made up his
LINE 69: mind once for all that what he saw happening around him that evening was
LINE 70: in some way essential.
LINE 71: The chanting of the service ceased, and the voice of the priest was
LINE 72: heard respectfully congratulating the dying man on having received the
LINE 73: sacrament. The dying man lay as lifeless and immovable as before. Around
LINE 74: him everyone began to stir: steps were audible and whispers, among which
LINE 75: Anna Mikháylovna's was the most distinct.
LINE 76: Pierre heard her say:
LINE 77: "Certainly he must be moved onto the bed; here it will be
LINE 78: impossible..."
LINE 79: The sick man was so surrounded by doctors, princesses, and servants
LINE 80: that Pierre could no longer see the reddish-yellow face with its gray
LINE 81: mane—which, though he saw other faces as well, he had not lost sight
LINE 82: of for a single moment during the whole service. He judged by the
LINE 83: cautious movements of those who crowded round the invalid chair that
LINE 84: they had lifted the dying man and were moving him.
LINE 85: "Catch hold of my arm or you'll drop him!" he heard one of the
LINE 86: servants say in a frightened whisper. "Catch hold from underneath.
LINE 87: Here!" exclaimed different voices; and the heavy breathing of the
LINE 88: bearers and the shuffling of their feet grew more hurried, as if the
LINE 89: weight they were carrying were too much for them.
LINE 90: As the bearers, among whom was Anna Mikháylovna, passed the young man
LINE 91: he caught a momentary glimpse between their heads and backs of the dying
LINE 92: man's high, stout, uncovered chest and powerful shoulders, raised by
LINE 93: those who were holding him under the armpits, and of his gray, curly,
LINE 94: leonine head. This head, with its remarkably broad brow and cheekbones,
LINE 95: its handsome, sensual mouth, and its cold, majestic expression, was
LINE 96: not disfigured by the approach of death. It was the same as Pierre
LINE 97: remembered it three months before, when the count had sent him to
LINE 98: Petersburg. But now this head was swaying helplessly with the uneven
LINE 99: movements of the bearers, and the cold listless gaze fixed itself upon
LINE 100: nothing.
LINE 101: After a few minutes' bustle beside the high bedstead, those who had
LINE 102: carried the sick man dispersed. Anna Mikháylovna touched Pierre's
LINE 103: hand and said, "Come." Pierre went with her to the bed on which the
LINE 104: sick man had been laid in a stately pose in keeping with the ceremony
LINE 105: just completed. He lay with his head propped high on the pillows. His
LINE 106: hands were symmetrically placed on the green silk quilt, the palms
LINE 107: downward. When Pierre came up the count was gazing straight at him, but
LINE 108: with a look the significance of which could not be understood by mortal
LINE 109: man. Either this look meant nothing but that as long as one has eyes
LINE 110: they must look somewhere, or it meant too much. Pierre hesitated,
LINE 111: not knowing what to do, and glanced inquiringly at his guide. Anna
LINE 112: Mikháylovna made a hurried sign with her eyes, glancing at the sick
LINE 113: man's hand and moving her lips as if to send it a kiss. Pierre,
LINE 114: carefully stretching his neck so as not to touch the quilt, followed her
LINE 115: suggestion and pressed his lips to the large boned, fleshy hand. Neither
LINE 116: the hand nor a single muscle of the count's face stirred. Once more
LINE 117: Pierre looked questioningly at Anna Mikháylovna to see what he was to
LINE 118: do next. Anna Mikháylovna with her eyes indicated a chair that stood
LINE 119: beside the bed. Pierre obediently sat down, his eyes asking if he were
LINE 120: doing right. Anna Mikháylovna nodded approvingly. Again Pierre fell
LINE 121: into the naïvely symmetrical pose of an Egyptian statue, evidently
LINE 122: distressed that his stout and clumsy body took up so much room and doing
LINE 123: his utmost to look as small as possible. He looked at the count, who
LINE 124: still gazed at the spot where Pierre's face had been before he sat
LINE 125: down. Anna Mikháylovna indicated by her attitude her consciousness of
LINE 126: the pathetic importance of these last moments of meeting between the
LINE 127: father and son. This lasted about two minutes, which to Pierre seemed an
LINE 128: hour. Suddenly the broad muscles and lines of the count's face began
LINE 129: to twitch. The twitching increased, the handsome mouth was drawn to one
LINE 130: side (only now did Pierre realize how near death his father was), and
LINE 131: from that distorted mouth issued an indistinct, hoarse sound. Anna
LINE 132: Mikháylovna looked attentively at the sick man's eyes, trying to
LINE 133: guess what he wanted; she pointed first to Pierre, then to some drink,
LINE 134: then named Prince Vasíli in an inquiring whisper, then pointed to the
LINE 135: quilt. The eyes and face of the sick man showed impatience. He made an
LINE 136: effort to look at the servant who stood constantly at the head of the
LINE 137: bed.
LINE 138: "Wants to turn on the other side," whispered the servant, and got up
LINE 139: to turn the count's heavy body toward the wall.
LINE 140: Pierre rose to help him.
LINE 141: While the count was being turned over, one of his arms fell back
LINE 142: helplessly and he made a fruitless effort to pull it forward. Whether he
LINE 143: noticed the look of terror with which Pierre regarded that lifeless arm,
LINE 144: or whether some other thought flitted across his dying brain, at any
LINE 145: rate he glanced at the refractory arm, at Pierre's terror-stricken
LINE 146: face, and again at the arm, and on his face a feeble, piteous smile
LINE 147: appeared, quite out of keeping with his features, that seemed to deride
LINE 148: his own helplessness. At sight of this smile Pierre felt an unexpected
LINE 149: quivering in his breast and a tickling in his nose, and tears dimmed his
LINE 150: eyes. The sick man was turned on to his side with his face to the wall.
LINE 151: He sighed.
LINE 152: "He is dozing," said Anna Mikháylovna, observing that one of the
LINE 153: princesses was coming to take her turn at watching. "Let us go."
LINE 154: Pierre went out.