LINE 1: The friends were silent. Neither cared to begin talking. Pierre
LINE 2: continually glanced at Prince Andrew; Prince Andrew rubbed his forehead
LINE 3: with his small hand.
LINE 4: "Let us go and have supper," he said with a sigh, going to the door.
LINE 5: They entered the elegant, newly decorated, and luxurious dining room.
LINE 6: Everything from the table napkins to the silver, china, and glass bore
LINE 7: that imprint of newness found in the households of the newly married.
LINE 8: Halfway through supper Prince Andrew leaned his elbows on the table and,
LINE 9: with a look of nervous agitation such as Pierre had never before seen on
LINE 10: his face, began to talk—as one who has long had something on his mind
LINE 11: and suddenly determines to speak out.
LINE 12: "Never, never marry, my dear fellow! That's my advice: never marry
LINE 13: till you can say to yourself that you have done all you are capable of,
LINE 14: and until you have ceased to love the woman of your choice and have seen
LINE 15: her plainly as she is, or else you will make a cruel and irrevocable
LINE 16: mistake. Marry when you are old and good for nothing—or all that is
LINE 17: good and noble in you will be lost. It will all be wasted on trifles.
LINE 18: Yes! Yes! Yes! Don't look at me with such surprise. If you marry
LINE 19: expecting anything from yourself in the future, you will feel at every
LINE 20: step that for you all is ended, all is closed except the drawing
LINE 21: room, where you will be ranged side by side with a court lackey and an
LINE 22: idiot!... But what's the good?..." and he waved his arm.
LINE 23: Pierre took off his spectacles, which made his face seem different and
LINE 24: the good-natured expression still more apparent, and gazed at his friend
LINE 25: in amazement.
LINE 26: "My wife," continued Prince Andrew, "is an excellent woman, one
LINE 27: of those rare women with whom a man's honor is safe; but, O God, what
LINE 28: would I not give now to be unmarried! You are the first and only one to
LINE 29: whom I mention this, because I like you."
LINE 30: As he said this Prince Andrew was less than ever like that Bolkónski
LINE 31: who had lolled in Anna Pávlovna's easy chairs and with half-closed
LINE 32: eyes had uttered French phrases between his teeth. Every muscle of his
LINE 33: thin face was now quivering with nervous excitement; his eyes, in which
LINE 34: the fire of life had seemed extinguished, now flashed with brilliant
LINE 35: light. It was evident that the more lifeless he seemed at ordinary
LINE 36: times, the more impassioned he became in these moments of almost morbid
LINE 37: irritation.
LINE 38: "You don't understand why I say this," he continued, "but it is
LINE 39: the whole story of life. You talk of Bonaparte and his career," said
LINE 40: he (though Pierre had not mentioned Bonaparte), "but Bonaparte when
LINE 41: he worked went step by step toward his goal. He was free, he had nothing
LINE 42: but his aim to consider, and he reached it. But tie yourself up with
LINE 43: a woman and, like a chained convict, you lose all freedom! And all you
LINE 44: have of hope and strength merely weighs you down and torments you with
LINE 45: regret. Drawing rooms, gossip, balls, vanity, and triviality—these are
LINE 46: the enchanted circle I cannot escape from. I am now going to the war,
LINE 47: the greatest war there ever was, and I know nothing and am fit for
LINE 48: nothing. I am very amiable and have a caustic wit," continued Prince
LINE 49: Andrew, "and at Anna Pávlovna's they listen to me. And that stupid
LINE 50: set without whom my wife cannot exist, and those women.... If you only
LINE 51: knew what those society women are, and women in general! My father is
LINE 52: right. Selfish, vain, stupid, trivial in everything—that's what
LINE 53: women are when you see them in their true colors! When you meet them
LINE 54: in society it seems as if there were something in them, but there's
LINE 55: nothing, nothing, nothing! No, don't marry, my dear fellow; don't
LINE 56: marry!" concluded Prince Andrew.
LINE 57: "It seems funny to me," said Pierre, "that you, you should
LINE 58: consider yourself incapable and your life a spoiled life. You have
LINE 59: everything before you, everything. And you...."
LINE 60: He did not finish his sentence, but his tone showed how highly he
LINE 61: thought of his friend and how much he expected of him in the future.
LINE 62: "How can he talk like that?" thought Pierre. He considered his
LINE 63: friend a model of perfection because Prince Andrew possessed in the
LINE 64: highest degree just the very qualities Pierre lacked, and which might
LINE 65: be best described as strength of will. Pierre was always astonished at
LINE 66: Prince Andrew's calm manner of treating everybody, his extraordinary
LINE 67: memory, his extensive reading (he had read everything, knew everything,
LINE 68: and had an opinion about everything), but above all at his capacity for
LINE 69: work and study. And if Pierre was often struck by Andrew's lack
LINE 70: of capacity for philosophical meditation (to which he himself was
LINE 71: particularly addicted), he regarded even this not as a defect but as a
LINE 72: sign of strength.
LINE 73: Even in the best, most friendly and simplest relations of life, praise
LINE 74: and commendation are essential, just as grease is necessary to wheels
LINE 75: that they may run smoothly.
LINE 76: "My part is played out," said Prince Andrew. "What's the use of
LINE 77: talking about me? Let us talk about you," he added after a silence,
LINE 78: smiling at his reassuring thoughts.
LINE 79: That smile was immediately reflected on Pierre's face.
LINE 80: "But what is there to say about me?" said Pierre, his face relaxing
LINE 81: into a careless, merry smile. "What am I? An illegitimate son!"
LINE 82: He suddenly blushed crimson, and it was plain that he had made a great
LINE 83: effort to say this. "Without a name and without means... And it
LINE 84: really..." But he did not say what "it really" was. "For the
LINE 85: present I am free and am all right. Only I haven't the least idea what
LINE 86: I am to do; I wanted to consult you seriously."
LINE 87: Prince Andrew looked kindly at him, yet his glance—friendly and
LINE 88: affectionate as it was—expressed a sense of his own superiority.
LINE 89: "I am fond of you, especially as you are the one live man among our
LINE 90: whole set. Yes, you're all right! Choose what you will; it's all the
LINE 91: same. You'll be all right anywhere. But look here: give up visiting
LINE 92: those Kurágins and leading that sort of life. It suits you so
LINE 93: badly—all this debauchery, dissipation, and the rest of it!"
LINE 94: "What would you have, my dear fellow?" answered Pierre, shrugging
LINE 95: his shoulders. "Women, my dear fellow; women!"
LINE 96: "I don't understand it," replied Prince Andrew. "Women who are
LINE 97: comme il faut, that's a different matter; but the Kurágins' set of
LINE 98: women, 'women and wine' I don't understand!"
LINE 99: Pierre was staying at Prince Vasíli Kurágin's and sharing the
LINE 100: dissipated life of his son Anatole, the son whom they were planning to
LINE 101: reform by marrying him to Prince Andrew's sister.
LINE 102: "Do you know?" said Pierre, as if suddenly struck by a happy
LINE 103: thought, "seriously, I have long been thinking of it.... Leading such
LINE 104: a life I can't decide or think properly about anything. One's head
LINE 105: aches, and one spends all one's money. He asked me for tonight, but I
LINE 106: won't go."
LINE 107: "You give me your word of honor not to go?"
LINE 108: "On my honor!"