LINE 1: When Ellis, after this rebuff, had disconsolately taken his leave,
LINE 2: Clara, much elated at the righteous punishment she had inflicted upon
LINE 3: the slanderer, ran upstairs to the nursery, and, snatching Dodie from
LINE 4: Mammy Jane's arms, began dancing gayly with him round the room.
LINE 5: "Look a-hyuh, honey," said Mammy Jane, "you better be keerful wid dat
LINE 6: chile, an' don' drap 'im on de flo'. You might let him fall on his head
LINE 7: an' break his neck. My, my! but you two does make a pretty pictur'!
LINE 8: You'll be wantin' ole Jane ter come an' nuss yo' child'en some er dese
LINE 9: days," she chuckled unctuously.
LINE 10: Mammy Jane had been very much disturbed by the recent dangers through
LINE 11: which little Dodie had passed; and his escape from strangulation, in the
LINE 12: first place, and then from the knife had impressed her as little less
LINE 13: than miraculous. She was not certain whether this result had been
LINE 14: brought about by her manipulation of the buried charm, or by the prayers
LINE 15: which had been offered for the child, but was inclined to believe that
LINE 16: both had cooperated to avert the threatened calamity. The favorable
LINE 17: outcome of this particular incident had not, however, altered the
LINE 18: general situation. Prayers and charms, after all, were merely temporary
LINE 19: things, which must be constantly renewed, and might be forgotten or
LINE 20: overlooked; while the mole, on the contrary, neither faded nor went
LINE 21: away. If its malign influence might for a time seem to disappear, it was
LINE 22: merely lying dormant, like the germs of some deadly disease, awaiting
LINE 23: its opportunity to strike at an unguarded spot.
LINE 24: Clara and the baby were laughing in great glee, when a mockingbird,
LINE 25: perched on the topmost bough of a small tree opposite the nursery
LINE 26: window, burst suddenly into song, with many a trill and quaver. Clara,
LINE 27: with the child in her arms, sprang to the open window.
LINE 28: "Sister Olivia," she cried, turning her face toward Mrs. Carteret, who
LINE 29: at that moment entered the room, "come and look at Dodie."
LINE 30: The baby was listening intently to the music, meanwhile gurgling with
LINE 31: delight, and reaching his chubby hands toward the source of this
LINE 32: pleasing sound. It seemed as though the mockingbird were aware of his
LINE 33: appreciative audience, for he ran through the songs of a dozen different
LINE 34: birds, selecting, with the discrimination of a connoisseur and entire
LINE 35: confidence in his own powers, those which were most difficult and most
LINE 36: alluring.
LINE 37: Mrs. Carteret approached the window, followed by Mammy Jane, who waddled
LINE 38: over to join the admiring party. So absorbed were the three women in the
LINE 39: baby and the bird that neither one of them observed a neat top buggy,
LINE 40: drawn by a sleek sorrel pony, passing slowly along the street before the
LINE 41: house. In the buggy was seated a lady, and beside her a little boy,
LINE 42: dressed in a child's sailor suit and a straw hat. The lady, with a
LINE 43: wistful expression, was looking toward the party grouped in the open
LINE 44: window.
LINE 45: Mrs. Carteret, chancing to lower her eyes for an instant, caught the
LINE 46: other woman's look directed toward her and her child. With a glance of
LINE 47: cold aversion she turned away from the window.
LINE 48: Old Mammy Jane had observed this movement, and had divined the reason
LINE 49: for it. She stood beside Clara, watching the retreating buggy.
LINE 50: "Uhhuh!" she said to herself, "it's huh sister Janet! She ma'ied a
LINE 51: doctuh, an' all dat, an' she lives in a big house, an' she's be'n roun'
LINE 52: de worl' an de Lawd knows where e'se: but Mis' 'Livy don' like de sight
LINE 53: er her, an' never will, ez long ez de sun rises an' sets. Dey ce't'nly
LINE 54: does favor one anudder,--anybody mought 'low dey wuz twins, ef dey didn'
LINE 55: know better. Well, well! Fo'ty yeahs ago who'd 'a' ever expected ter
LINE 56: see a nigger gal ridin' in her own buggy? My, my! but I don' know,--I
LINE 57: don' know! It don' look right, an' it ain' gwine ter las'!--you can't
LINE 58: make me b'lieve!"
LINE 59: Meantime Janet, stung by Mrs. Carteret's look,--the nearest approach she
LINE 60: had ever made to a recognition of her sister's existence,--had turned
LINE 61: away with hardening face. She had struck her pony sharply with the whip,
LINE 62: much to the gentle creature's surprise, when the little boy, who was
LINE 63: still looking back, caught his mother's sleeve and exclaimed
LINE 64: excitedly:--
LINE 65: "Look, look, mamma! The baby,--the baby!"
LINE 66: Janet turned instantly, and with a mother's instinct gave an involuntary
LINE 67: cry of alarm.
LINE 68: At the moment when Mrs. Carteret had turned away from the window, and
LINE 69: while Mammy Jane was watching Janet, Clara had taken a step forward, and
LINE 70: was leaning against the window-sill. The baby, convulsed with delight,
LINE 71: had given a spasmodic spring and slipped from Clara's arms.
LINE 72: Instinctively the young woman gripped the long skirt as it slipped
LINE 73: through her hands, and held it tenaciously, though too frightened for an
LINE 74: instant to do more. Mammy Jane, ashen with sudden dread, uttered an
LINE 75: inarticulate scream, but retained self-possession enough to reach down
LINE 76: and draw up the child, which hung dangerously suspended, head downward,
LINE 77: over the brick pavement below.
LINE 78: "Oh, Clara, Clara, how could you!" exclaimed Mrs. Carteret
LINE 79: reproachfully; "you might have killed my child!"
LINE 80: She had snatched the child from Jane's arms, and was holding him closely
LINE 81: to her own breast. Struck by a sudden thought, she drew near the window
LINE 82: and looked out. Twice within a few weeks her child had been in serious
LINE 83: danger, and upon each occasion a member of the Miller family had been
LINE 84: involved, for she had heard of Dr. Miller's presumption in trying to
LINE 85: force himself where he must have known he would be unwelcome.
LINE 86: Janet was just turning her head away as the buggy moved slowly off.
LINE 87: Olivia felt a violent wave of antipathy sweep over her toward this
LINE 88: baseborn sister who had thus thrust herself beneath her eyes. If she had
LINE 89: not cast her brazen glance toward the window, she herself would not have
LINE 90: turned away and lost sight of her child. To this shameless intrusion,
LINE 91: linked with Clara's carelessness, had been due the catastrophe, so
LINE 92: narrowly averted, which might have darkened her own life forever. She
LINE 93: took to her bed for several days, and for a long time was cold toward
LINE 94: Clara, and did not permit her to touch the child.
LINE 95: Mammy Jane entertained a theory of her own about the accident, by which
LINE 96: the blame was placed, in another way, exactly where Mrs. Carteret had
LINE 97: laid it. Julia's daughter, Janet, had been looking intently toward the
LINE 98: window just before little Dodie had sprung from Clara's arms. Might she
LINE 99: not have cast the evil eye upon the baby, and sought thereby to draw him
LINE 100: out of the window? One would not ordinarily expect so young a woman to
LINE 101: possess such a power, but she might have acquired it, for this very
LINE 102: purpose, from some more experienced person. By the same reasoning, the
LINE 103: mockingbird might have been a familiar of the witch, and the two might
LINE 104: have conspired to lure the infant to destruction. Whether this were so
LINE 105: or not, the transaction at least wore a peculiar look. There was no use
LINE 106: telling Mis' 'Livy about it, for she didn't believe, or pretended not
LINE 107: to believe, in witchcraft and conjuration. But one could not be too
LINE 108: careful. The child was certainly born to be exposed to great
LINE 109: dangers,--the mole behind the left ear was an unfailing sign,--and no
LINE 110: precaution should be omitted to counteract its baleful influence.
LINE 111: While adjusting the baby's crib, a few days later, Mrs. Carteret found
LINE 112: fastened under one of the slats a small bag of cotton cloth, about half
LINE 113: an inch long and tied with a black thread, upon opening which she found
LINE 114: a few small roots or fibres and a pinch of dried and crumpled herbs. It
LINE 115: was a good-luck charm which Mammy Jane had placed there to ward off the
LINE 116: threatened evil from the grandchild of her dear old mistress. Mrs.
LINE 117: Carteret's first impulse was to throw the bag into the fire, but on
LINE 118: second thoughts she let it remain. To remove it would give unnecessary
LINE 119: pain to the old nurse. Of course these old negro superstitions were
LINE 120: absurd,--but if the charm did no good, it at least would do no harm.