LINE 1: Old Mr. Delamere's servant, Sandy Campbell, was in deep trouble.
LINE 2: A party of Northern visitors had been staying for several days at the
LINE 3: St. James Hotel. The gentlemen of the party were concerned in a
LINE 4: projected cotton mill, while the ladies were much interested in the
LINE 5: study of social conditions, and especially in the negro problem. As soon
LINE 6: as their desire for information became known, they were taken
LINE 7: courteously under the wing of prominent citizens and their wives, who
LINE 8: gave them, at elaborate luncheons, the Southern white man's views of the
LINE 9: negro, sighing sentimentally over the disappearance of the good old
LINE 10: negro of before the war, and gravely deploring the degeneracy of his
LINE 11: descendants. They enlarged upon the amount of money the Southern whites
LINE 12: had spent for the education of the negro, and shook their heads over the
LINE 13: inadequate results accruing from this unexampled generosity. It was sad,
LINE 14: they said, to witness this spectacle of a dying race, unable to
LINE 15: withstand the competition of a superior type. The severe reprisals taken
LINE 16: by white people for certain crimes committed by negroes were of course
LINE 17: not the acts of the best people, who deplored them; but still a certain
LINE 18: charity should be extended towards those who in the intense and
LINE 19: righteous anger of the moment should take the law into their own hands
LINE 20: and deal out rough but still substantial justice; for no negro was ever
LINE 21: lynched without incontestable proof of his guilt. In order to be
LINE 22: perfectly fair, and give their visitors an opportunity to see both sides
LINE 23: of the question, they accompanied the Northern visitors to a colored
LINE 24: church where they might hear a colored preacher, who had won a jocular
LINE 25: popularity throughout the whole country by an oft-repeated sermon
LINE 26: intended to demonstrate that the earth was flat like a pancake. This
LINE 27: celebrated divine could always draw a white audience, except on the days
LINE 28: when his no less distinguished white rival in the field of
LINE 29: sensationalism preached his equally famous sermon to prove that hell was
LINE 30: exactly one half mile, linear measure, from the city limits of
LINE 31: Wellington. Whether accidentally or not, the Northern visitors had no
LINE 32: opportunity to meet or talk alone with any colored person in the city
LINE 33: except the servants at the hotel. When one of the party suggested a
LINE 34: visit to the colored mission school, a Southern friend kindly
LINE 35: volunteered to accompany them.
LINE 36: The visitors were naturally much impressed by what they learned from
LINE 37: their courteous hosts, and felt inclined to sympathize with the Southern
LINE 38: people, for the negro is not counted as a Southerner, except to fix the
LINE 39: basis of congressional representation. There might of course be things
LINE 40: to criticise here and there, certain customs for which they did not
LINE 41: exactly see the necessity, and which seemed in conflict with the highest
LINE 42: ideals of liberty but surely these courteous, soft-spoken ladies and
LINE 43: gentlemen, entirely familiar with local conditions, who descanted so
LINE 44: earnestly and at times pathetically upon the grave problems confronting
LINE 45: them, must know more about it than people in the distant North, without
LINE 46: their means of information. The negroes who waited on them at the hotel
LINE 47: seemed happy enough, and the teachers whom they had met at the mission
LINE 48: school had been well-dressed, well-mannered, and apparently content with
LINE 49: their position in life. Surely a people who made no complaints could not
LINE 50: be very much oppressed.
LINE 51: In order to give the visitors, ere they left Wellington, a pleasing
LINE 52: impression of Southern customs, and particularly of the joyous,
LINE 53: happy-go-lucky disposition of the Southern darky and his entire
LINE 54: contentment with existing conditions, it was decided by the hotel
LINE 55: management to treat them, on the last night of their visit, to a little
LINE 56: diversion, in the shape of a genuine negro cakewalk.
LINE 57: On the afternoon of this same day Tom Delamere strolled into the hotel,
LINE 58: and soon gravitated to the bar, where he was a frequent visitor. Young
LINE 59: men of leisure spent much of their time around the hotel, and no small
LINE 60: part of it in the bar. Delamere had been to the club, but had avoided
LINE 61: the card-room. Time hanging heavy on his hands, he had sought the hotel
LINE 62: in the hope that some form of distraction might present itself.
LINE 63: "Have you heard the latest, Mr. Delamere?" asked the bartender, as he
LINE 64: mixed a cocktail for his customer.
LINE 65: "No, Billy; what is it?"
LINE 66: "There's to be a big cakewalk upstairs to-night. The No'the'n gentlemen
LINE 67: an' ladies who are down here to see about the new cotton fact'ry want to
LINE 68: study the nigger some more, and the boss has got up a cakewalk for 'em,
LINE 69: 'mongst the waiters and chambermaids, with a little outside talent."
LINE 70: "Is it to be public?" asked Delamere.
LINE 71: "Oh, no, not generally, but friends of the house won't be barred out.
LINE 72: The clerk 'll fix it for you. Ransom, the head waiter, will be floor
LINE 73: manager."
LINE 74: Delamere was struck with a brilliant idea. The more he considered it,
LINE 75: the brighter it seemed. Another cocktail imparted additional brilliancy
LINE 76: to the conception. He had been trying, after a feeble fashion, to keep
LINE 77: his promise to Clara, and was really suffering from lack of excitement.
LINE 78: He left the bar-room, found the head waiter, held with him a short
LINE 79: conversation, and left in his intelligent and itching palm a piece of
LINE 80: money.
LINE 81: The cakewalk was a great success. The most brilliant performer was a
LINE 82: late arrival, who made his appearance just as the performance was about
LINE 83: to commence. The newcomer was dressed strikingly, the conspicuous
LINE 84: features of his attire being a long blue coat with brass buttons and a
LINE 85: pair of plaid trousers. He was older, too, than the other participants,
LINE 86: which made his agility the more remarkable. His partner was a new
LINE 87: chambermaid, who had just come to town, and whom the head waiter
LINE 88: introduced to the newcomer upon his arrival. The cake was awarded to
LINE 89: this couple by a unanimous vote. The man presented it to his partner
LINE 90: with a grandiloquent flourish, and returned thanks in a speech which
LINE 91: sent the Northern visitors into spasms of delight at the quaintness of
LINE 92: the darky dialect and the darky wit. To cap the climax, the winner
LINE 93: danced a buck dance with a skill and agility that brought a shower of
LINE 94: complimentary silver, which he gathered up and passed to the head
LINE 95: waiter.
LINE 96: Ellis was off duty for the evening. Not having ventured to put in an
LINE 97: appearance at Carteret's since his last rebuff, he found himself
LINE 98: burdened with a superfluity of leisure, from which he essayed to find
LINE 99: relief by dropping into the hotel office at about nine o'clock. He was
LINE 100: invited up to see the cakewalk, which he rather enjoyed, for there was
LINE 101: some graceful dancing and posturing. But the grotesque contortions of
LINE 102: one participant had struck him as somewhat overdone, even for the
LINE 103: comical type of negro. He recognized the fellow, after a few minutes'
LINE 104: scrutiny, as the body-servant of old Mr. Delamere. The man's present
LINE 105: occupation, or choice of diversion, seemed out of keeping with his
LINE 106: employment as attendant upon an invalid old gentleman, and strangely
LINE 107: inconsistent with the gravity and decorum which had been so noticeable
LINE 108: when this agile cakewalker had served as butler at Major Carteret's
LINE 109: table, upon the occasion of the christening dinner. There was a vague
LINE 110: suggestion of unreality about this performance, too, which Ellis did not
LINE 111: attempt to analyze, but which recurred vividly to his memory upon a
LINE 112: subsequent occasion.
LINE 113: Ellis had never pretended to that intimate knowledge of negro thought
LINE 114: and character by which some of his acquaintances claimed the ability to
LINE 115: fathom every motive of a negro's conduct, and predict in advance what
LINE 116: any one of the darker race would do under a given set of circumstances.
LINE 117: He would not have believed that a white man could possess two so widely
LINE 118: varying phases of character; but as to negroes, they were as yet a crude
LINE 119: and undeveloped race, and it was not safe to make predictions concerning
LINE 120: them. No one could tell at what moment the thin veneer of civilization
LINE 121: might peel off and reveal the underlying savage.
LINE 122: The champion cakewalker, much to the surprise of his sable companions,
LINE 123: who were about equally swayed by admiration and jealousy, disappeared
LINE 124: immediately after the close of the performance. Any one watching him on
LINE 125: his way home through the quiet streets to old Mr. Delamere's would have
LINE 126: seen him now and then shaking with laughter. It had been excellent fun.
LINE 127: Nevertheless, as he neared home, a certain aspect of the affair,
LINE 128: hitherto unconsidered, occurred to him, and it was in a rather serious
LINE 129: frame of mind that he cautiously entered the house and sought his own
LINE 130: room.
LINE 131: * * * * *
LINE 132: The cakewalk had results which to Sandy were very serious. The following
LINE 133: week he was summoned before the disciplinary committee of his church and
LINE 134: charged with unchristian conduct, in the following particulars, to wit:
LINE 135: dancing, and participating in a sinful diversion called a cakewalk,
LINE 136: which was calculated to bring the church into disrepute and make it the
LINE 137: mockery of sinners.
LINE 138: Sandy protested his innocence vehemently, but in vain. The proof was
LINE 139: overwhelming. He was positively identified by Sister 'Manda Patterson,
LINE 140: the hotel cook, who had watched the whole performance from the hotel
LINE 141: corridor for the sole, single, solitary, and only purpose, she averred,
LINE 142: of seeing how far human wickedness could be carried by a professing
LINE 143: Christian. The whole thing had been shocking and offensive to her, and
LINE 144: only a stern sense of duty had sustained her in looking on, that she
LINE 145: might be qualified to bear witness against the offender. She had
LINE 146: recognized his face, his clothes, his voice, his walk--there could be no
LINE 147: shadow of doubt that it was Brother Sandy. This testimony was confirmed
LINE 148: by one of the deacons, whose son, a waiter at the hotel, had also seen
LINE 149: Sandy at the cakewalk.
LINE 150: Sandy stoutly insisted that he was at home the whole evening; that he
LINE 151: had not been near the hotel for three months; that he had never in his
LINE 152: life taken part in a cakewalk, and that he did not know how to dance.
LINE 153: It was replied that wickedness, like everything else, must have a
LINE 154: beginning; that dancing was an art that could be acquired in secret, and
LINE 155: came natural to some people. In the face of positive proof, Sandy's
LINE 156: protestations were of no avail; he was found guilty, and suspended from
LINE 157: church fellowship until he should have repented and made full
LINE 158: confession.
LINE 159: Sturdily refusing to confess a fault of which he claimed to be innocent,
LINE 160: Sandy remained in contumacy, thereby falling somewhat into disrepute
LINE 161: among the members of his church, the largest in the city. The effect of
LINE 162: a bad reputation being subjective as well as objective, and poor human
LINE 163: nature arguing that one may as well have the game as the name, Sandy
LINE 164: insensibly glided into habits of which the church would not have
LINE 165: approved, though he took care that they should not interfere with his
LINE 166: duties to Mr. Delamere. The consolation thus afforded, however, followed
LINE 167: as it was by remorse of conscience, did not compensate him for the loss
LINE 168: of standing in the church, which to him was a social club as well as a
LINE 169: religious temple. At times, in conversation with young Delamere, he
LINE 170: would lament his hard fate.
LINE 171: Tom laughed until he cried at the comical idea which Sandy's plaint
LINE 172: always brought up, of half-a-dozen negro preachers sitting in solemn
LINE 173: judgment upon that cakewalk,--it had certainly been a good
LINE 174: cakewalk!--and sending poor Sandy to spiritual Coventry.
LINE 175: "Cheer up, Sandy, cheer up!" he would say when Sandy seemed most
LINE 176: depressed. "Go into my room and get yourself a good drink of liquor. The
LINE 177: devil's church has a bigger congregation than theirs, and we have the
LINE 178: consolation of knowing that when we die, we'll meet all our friends on
LINE 179: the other side. Brace up, Sandy, and be a man, or, if you can't be a
LINE 180: man, be as near a man as you can!"
LINE 181: Hoping to revive his drooping spirits, Sandy too often accepted the
LINE 182: proffered remedy.