LINE 1: Having finished cleaning his clothes, Sandy went out to the kitchen for
LINE 2: supper, after which he found himself with nothing to do. Mr. Delamere's
LINE 3: absence relieved him from attendance at the house during the evening. He
LINE 4: might have smoked his pipe tranquilly in the kitchen until bedtime, had
LINE 5: not the cook intimated, rather pointedly, that she expected other
LINE 6: company. To a man of Sandy's tact a word was sufficient, and he resigned
LINE 7: himself to seeking companionship elsewhere.
LINE 8: Under normal circumstances, Sandy would have attended prayer-meeting on
LINE 9: this particular evening of the week; but being still in contumacy, and
LINE 10: cherishing what he considered the just resentment of a man falsely
LINE 11: accused, he stifled the inclination which by long habit led him toward
LINE 12: the church, and set out for the house of a friend with whom it occurred
LINE 13: to him that he might spend the evening pleasantly. Unfortunately, his
LINE 14: friend proved to be not at home, so Sandy turned his footsteps toward
LINE 15: the lower part of the town, where the streets were well lighted, and on
LINE 16: pleasant evenings quite animated. On the way he met Josh Green, whom he
LINE 17: had known for many years, though their paths did not often cross. In his
LINE 18: loneliness Sandy accepted an invitation to go with Josh and have a
LINE 19: drink,--a single drink. When Sandy was going home about eleven
LINE 20: o'clock, three sheets in the wind, such was the potent effect of the
LINE 21: single drink and those which had followed it, he was scared almost into
LINE 22: soberness by a remarkable apparition. As it seemed to Sandy, he saw
LINE 23: himself hurrying along in front of himself toward the house. Possibly
LINE 24: the muddled condition of Sandy's intellect had so affected his judgment
LINE 25: as to vitiate any conclusion he might draw, but Sandy was quite sober
LINE 26: enough to perceive that the figure ahead of him wore his best clothes
LINE 27: and looked exactly like him, but seemed to be in something more of a
LINE 28: hurry, a discrepancy which Sandy at once corrected by quickening his own
LINE 29: pace so as to maintain as nearly as possible an equal distance between
LINE 30: himself and his double. The situation was certainly an incomprehensible
LINE 31: one, and savored of the supernatural.
LINE 32: "Ef dat's me gwine 'long in front," mused Sandy, in vinous perplexity,
LINE 33: "den who is dis behin' here? Dere ain' but one er me, an' my ha'nt wouldn'
LINE 34: leave my body 'tel I wuz dead. Ef dat's me in front, den I mus' be my
LINE 35: own ha'nt; an' whichever one of us is de ha'nt, de yuther must be dead
LINE 36: an' don' know it. I don' know what ter make er no sech gwines-on, I
LINE 37: don't. Maybe it ain' me after all, but it certainly do look lack me."
LINE 38: When the apparition disappeared in the house by the side door, Sandy
LINE 39: stood in the yard for several minutes, under the shade of an elm-tree,
LINE 40: before he could make up his mind to enter the house. He took courage,
LINE 41: however, upon the reflection that perhaps, after all, it was only the
LINE 42: bad liquor he had drunk. Bad liquor often made people see double.
LINE 43: He entered the house. It was dark, except for a light in Tom Delamere's
LINE 44: room. Sandy tapped softly at the door.
LINE 45: "Who's there?" came Delamere's voice, in a somewhat startled tone, after
LINE 46: a momentary silence.
LINE 47: "It's me, suh; Sandy."
LINE 48: They both spoke softly. It was the rule of the house when Mr. Delamere
LINE 49: had retired, and though he was not at home, habit held its wonted sway.
LINE 50: "Just a moment, Sandy."
LINE 51: Sandy waited patiently in the hall until the door was opened. If the
LINE 52: room showed any signs of haste or disorder, Sandy was too full of his
LINE 53: own thoughts--and other things--to notice them.
LINE 54: "What do you want, Sandy," asked Tom.
LINE 55: "Mistuh Tom," asked Sandy solemnly, "ef I wuz in yo' place, an' you wuz
LINE 56: in my place, an' we wuz bofe in de same place, whar would I be?"
LINE 57: Tom looked at Sandy keenly, with a touch of apprehension. Did Sandy mean
LINE 58: anything in particular by this enigmatical inquiry, and if so, what? But
LINE 59: Sandy's face clearly indicated a state of mind in which consecutive
LINE 60: thought was improbable; and after a brief glance Delamere breathed more
LINE 61: freely.
LINE 62: "I give it up, Sandy," he responded lightly. "That's too deep for me."
LINE 63: "'Scuse me, Mistuh Tom, but is you heared er seed anybody er anything
LINE 64: come in de house fer de las' ten minutes?"
LINE 65: "Why, no, Sandy, I haven't heard any one. I came from the club an hour
LINE 66: ago. I had forgotten my key, and Sally got up and let me in, and then
LINE 67: went back to bed. I've been sitting here reading ever since. I should
LINE 68: have heard any one who came in."
LINE 69: "Mistuh Tom," inquired Sandy anxiously, "would you 'low dat I'd be'n
LINE 70: drinkin' too much?"
LINE 71: "No, Sandy, I should say you were sober enough, though of course you
LINE 72: may have had a few drinks. Perhaps you'd like another? I've got
LINE 73: something good here."
LINE 74: "No, suh, Mistuh Tom, no, suh! No mo' liquor fer me, suh, never! When
LINE 75: liquor kin make a man see his own ha'nt, it's 'bout time fer dat man
LINE 76: ter quit drinkin', it sho' is! Good-night, Mistuh Tom."
LINE 77: As Sandy turned to go, Delamere was struck by a sudden and daring
LINE 78: thought. The creature of impulse, he acted upon it immediately.
LINE 79: "By the way, Sandy," he exclaimed carelessly, "I can pay you back that
LINE 80: money you were good enough to lend me this afternoon. I think I'll
LINE 81: sleep better if I have the debt off my mind, and I shouldn't wonder if
LINE 82: you would. You don't mind having it in gold, do you?"
LINE 83: "No, indeed, suh," replied Sandy. "I ain' seen no gol' fer so long dat
LINE 84: de sight er it'd be good fer my eyes."
LINE 85: Tom counted out ten five-dollar gold pieces upon the table at his elbow.
LINE 86: "And here's another, Sandy," he said, adding an eleventh, "as interest
LINE 87: for the use of it."
LINE 88: "Thank y', Mistuh Tom. I didn't spec' no in-trus', but I don' never
LINE 89: 'fuse gol' w'en I kin git it."
LINE 90: "And here," added Delamere, reaching carelessly into a bureau drawer,
LINE 91: "is a little old silk purse that I've had since I was a boy. I'll put
LINE 92: the gold in it, Sandy; it will hold it very nicely."
LINE 93: "Thank y', Mistuh Tom. You're a gentleman, suh, an' wo'thy er de fam'ly
LINE 94: name. Good-night, suh, an' I hope yo' dreams 'll be pleasanter 'n' mine.
LINE 95: Ef it wa'n't fer dis gol' kinder takin' my min' off'n dat ha'nt, I don'
LINE 96: s'pose I'd be able to do much sleepin' ter-night. Good-night, suh."
LINE 97: "Good-night, Sandy."
LINE 98: Whether or not Delamere slept soundly, or was troubled by dreams,
LINE 99: pleasant or unpleasant, it is nevertheless true that he locked his door,
LINE 100: and sat up an hour later, looking through the drawers of his bureau, and
LINE 101: burning several articles in the little iron stove which constituted part
LINE 102: of the bedroom furniture.
LINE 103: It is also true that he rose very early, before the household was
LINE 104: stirring. The cook slept in a room off the kitchen, which was in an
LINE 105: outhouse in the back yard. She was just stretching herself, preparatory
LINE 106: to getting up, when Tom came to her window and said that he was going
LINE 107: off fishing, to be gone all day, and that he would not wait for
LINE 108: breakfast.