LINE 1: About ten o'clock on the morning of the discovery of the murder, Captain
LINE 2: McBane and General Belmont, as though moved by a common impulse, found
LINE 3: themselves at the office of the Morning Chronicle. Carteret was
LINE 4: expecting them, though there had been no appointment made. These three
LINE 5: resourceful and energetic minds, representing no organized body, and
LINE 6: clothed with no legal authority, had so completely arrogated to
LINE 7: themselves the leadership of white public sentiment as to come together
LINE 8: instinctively when an event happened which concerned the public, and, as
LINE 9: this murder presumably did, involved the matter of race.
LINE 10: "Well, gentlemen," demanded McBane impatiently, "what are we going to do
LINE 11: with the scoundrel when we catch him?"
LINE 12: "They've got the murderer," announced a reporter, entering the room.
LINE 13: "Who is he?" they demanded in a breath.
LINE 14: "A nigger by the name of Sandy Campbell, a servant of old Mr. Delamere."
LINE 15: "How did they catch him?"
LINE 16: "Our Jerry saw him last night, going toward Mrs. Ochiltree's house, and
LINE 17: a white man saw him coming away, half an hour later."
LINE 18: "Has he confessed?"
LINE 19: "No, but he might as well. When the posse went to arrest him, they found
LINE 20: him cleaning the clothes he had worn last night, and discovered in his
LINE 21: room a part of the plunder. He denies it strenuously, but it seems a
LINE 22: clear case."
LINE 23: "There can be no doubt," said Ellis, who had come into the room behind
LINE 24: the reporter. "I saw the negro last night, at twelve o'clock, going into
LINE 25: Mr. Delamere's yard, with a bundle in his hand."
LINE 26: "He is the last negro I should have suspected," said Carteret. "Mr.
LINE 27: Delamere had implicit confidence in him."
LINE 28: "All niggers are alike," remarked McBane sententiously. "The only way to
LINE 29: keep them from stealing is not to give them the chance. A nigger will
LINE 30: steal a cent off a dead man's eye. He has assaulted and murdered a white
LINE 31: woman,--an example should be made of him."
LINE 32: Carteret recalled very distinctly the presence of this negro at his own
LINE 33: residence on the occasion of little Theodore's christening dinner. He
LINE 34: remembered having questioned the prudence of letting a servant know that
LINE 35: Mrs. Ochiltree kept money in the house. Mr. Delamere had insisted
LINE 36: strenuously upon the honesty of this particular negro. The whole race,
LINE 37: in the major's opinion, was morally undeveloped, and only held within
LINE 38: bounds by the restraining influence of the white people. Under Mr.
LINE 39: Delamere's thumb this Sandy had been a model servant,--faithful, docile,
LINE 40: respectful, and self-respecting; but Mr. Delamere had grown old, and had
LINE 41: probably lost in a measure his moral influence over his servant. Left to
LINE 42: his own degraded ancestral instincts, Sandy had begun to deteriorate,
LINE 43: and a rapid decline had culminated in this robbery and murder,--and who
LINE 44: knew what other horror? The criminal was a negro, the victim a white
LINE 45: woman;--it was only reasonable to expect the worst.
LINE 46: "He'll swing for it," observed the general.
LINE 47: Ellis went into another room, where his duty called him.
LINE 48: "He should burn for it," averred McBane. "I say, burn the nigger."
LINE 49: "This," said Carteret, "is something more than an ordinary crime, to be
LINE 50: dealt with by the ordinary processes of law. It is a murderous and fatal
LINE 51: assault upon a woman of our race,--upon our race in the person of its
LINE 52: womanhood, its crown and flower. If such crimes are not punished with
LINE 53: swift and terrible directness, the whole white womanhood of the South is
LINE 54: in danger."
LINE 55: "Burn the nigger," repeated McBane automatically.
LINE 56: "Neither is this a mere sporadic crime," Carteret went on. "It is
LINE 57: symptomatic; it is the logical and inevitable result of the conditions
LINE 58: which have prevailed in this town for the past year. It is the last
LINE 59: straw."
LINE 60: "Burn the nigger," reiterated McBane. "We seem to have the right nigger,
LINE 61: but whether we have or not, burn _a_ nigger. It is an assault upon the
LINE 62: white race, in the person of old Mrs. Ochiltree, committed by the black
LINE 63: race, in the person of some nigger. It would justify the white people in
LINE 64: burning _any_ nigger. The example would be all the more powerful if we
LINE 65: got the wrong one. It would serve notice on the niggers that we shall
LINE 66: hold the whole race responsible for the misdeeds of each individual."
LINE 67: "In ancient Rome," said the general, "when a master was killed by a
LINE 68: slave, all his slaves were put to the sword."
LINE 69: "We couldn't afford that before the war," said McBane, "but the niggers
LINE 70: don't belong to anybody now, and there's nothing to prevent our doing as
LINE 71: we please with them. A dead nigger is no loss to any white man. I say,
LINE 72: burn the nigger."
LINE 73: "I do not believe," said Carteret, who had gone to the window and was
LINE 74: looking out,--"I do not believe that we need trouble ourselves
LINE 75: personally about his punishment. I should judge, from the commotion in
LINE 76: the street, that the public will take the matter into its own hands. I,
LINE 77: for one, would prefer that any violence, however justifiable, should
LINE 78: take place without my active intervention."
LINE 79: "It won't take place without mine, if I know it," exclaimed McBane,
LINE 80: starting for the door.
LINE 81: "Hold on a minute, captain," exclaimed Carteret. "There's more at stake
LINE 82: in this matter than the life of a black scoundrel. Wellington is in the
LINE 83: hands of negroes and scalawags. What better time to rescue it?"
LINE 84: "It's a trifle premature," replied the general. "I should have preferred
LINE 85: to have this take place, if it was to happen, say three months hence, on
LINE 86: the eve of the election,--but discussion always provokes thirst with me;
LINE 87: I wonder if I could get Jerry to bring us some drinks?"
LINE 88: Carteret summoned the porter. Jerry's usual manner had taken on an
LINE 89: element of self-importance, resulting in what one might describe as a
LINE 90: sort of condescending obsequiousness. Though still a porter, he was also
LINE 91: a hero, and wore his aureole.
LINE 92: "Jerry," said the general kindly, "the white people are very much
LINE 93: pleased with the assistance you have given them in apprehending this
LINE 94: scoundrel Campbell. You have rendered a great public service, Jerry, and
LINE 95: we wish you to know that it is appreciated."
LINE 96: "Thank y', gin'l, thank y', suh! I alluz tries ter do my duty, suh, an'
LINE 97: stan' by dem dat stan's by me. Dat low-down nigger oughter be lynch',
LINE 98: suh, don't you think, er e'se bu'nt? Dere ain' nothin' too bad ter
LINE 99: happen ter 'im."
LINE 100: "No doubt he will be punished as he deserves, Jerry," returned the
LINE 101: general, "and we will see that you are suitably rewarded. Go across the
LINE 102: street and get me three Calhoun cocktails. I seem to have nothing less
LINE 103: than a two-dollar bill, but you may keep the change, Jerry,--all the
LINE 104: change."
LINE 105: Jerry was very happy. He had distinguished himself in the public view,
LINE 106: for to Jerry, as to the white people themselves, the white people were
LINE 107: the public. He had won the goodwill of the best people, and had already
LINE 108: begun to reap a tangible reward. It is true that several strange white
LINE 109: men looked at him with lowering brows as he crossed the street, which
LINE 110: was curiously empty of colored people; but he nevertheless went firmly
LINE 111: forward, panoplied in the consciousness of his own rectitude, and
LINE 112: serenely confident of the protection of the major and the major's
LINE 113: friends.
LINE 114: "Jerry is about the only negro I have seen since nine o'clock," observed
LINE 115: the general when the porter had gone. "If this were election day, where
LINE 116: would the negro vote be?"
LINE 117: "In hiding, where most of the negro population is to-day," answered
LINE 118: McBane. "It's a pity, if old Mrs. Ochiltree had to go this way, that it
LINE 119: couldn't have been deferred a month or six weeks." Carteret frowned
LINE 120: at this remark, which, coming from McBane, seemed lacking in human
LINE 121: feeling, as well as in respect to his wife's dead relative.
LINE 122: "But," resumed the general, "if this negro is lynched, as he well
LINE 123: deserves to be, it will not be without its effect. We still have in
LINE 124: reserve for the election a weapon which this affair will only render
LINE 125: more effective. What became of the piece in the negro paper?"
LINE 126: "I have it here," answered Carteret. "I was just about to use it as the
LINE 127: text for an editorial."
LINE 128: "Save it awhile longer," responded the general. "This crime itself will
LINE 129: give you text enough for a four-volume work."
LINE 130: When this conference ended, Carteret immediately put into press an extra
LINE 131: edition of the Morning Chronicle, which was soon upon the streets,
LINE 132: giving details of the crime, which was characterized as an atrocious
LINE 133: assault upon a defenseless old lady, whose age and sex would have
LINE 134: protected her from harm at the hands of any one but a brute in the
LINE 135: lowest human form. This event, the Chronicle suggested, had only
LINE 136: confirmed the opinion, which had been of late growing upon the white
LINE 137: people, that drastic efforts were necessary to protect the white women
LINE 138: of the South against brutal, lascivious, and murderous assaults at the
LINE 139: hands of negro men. It was only another significant example of the
LINE 140: results which might have been foreseen from the application of a false
LINE 141: and pernicious political theory, by which ignorance, clothed in a little
LINE 142: brief authority, was sought to be exalted over knowledge, vice over
LINE 143: virtue, an inferior and degraded race above the heaven-crowned
LINE 144: Anglo-Saxon. If an outraged people, justly infuriated, and impatient of
LINE 145: the slow processes of the courts, should assert their inherent
LINE 146: sovereignty, which the law after all was merely intended to embody, and
LINE 147: should choose, in obedience to the higher law, to set aside,
LINE 148: temporarily, the ordinary judicial procedure, it would serve as a
LINE 149: warning and an example to the vicious elements of the community, of the
LINE 150: swift and terrible punishment which would fall, like the judgment of
LINE 151: God, upon any one who laid sacrilegious hands upon white womanhood.