LINE 1: Miller did not reach his destination without interruption. At one point
LINE 2: a considerable stretch of the road was under repair, which made it
LINE 3: necessary for him to travel slowly. His horse cast a shoe, and
LINE 4: threatened to go lame; but in the course of time he arrived at the
LINE 5: entrance gate of Belleview, entering which he struck into a private
LINE 6: road, bordered by massive oaks, whose multitudinous branches, hung with
LINE 7: long streamers of trailing moss, formed for much of the way a thick
LINE 8: canopy above his head. It took him only a few minutes to traverse the
LINE 9: quarter of a mile that lay between the entrance gate and the house
LINE 10: itself.
LINE 11: This old colonial plantation, rich in legendary lore and replete with
LINE 12: historic distinction, had been in the Delamere family for nearly two
LINE 13: hundred years. Along the bank of the river which skirted its domain the
LINE 14: famous pirate Blackbeard had held high carnival, and was reputed to have
LINE 15: buried much treasure, vague traditions of which still lingered among the
LINE 16: negroes and poor-whites of the country roundabout. The beautiful
LINE 17: residence, rising white and stately in a grove of ancient oaks, dated
LINE 18: from 1750, and was built of brick which had been brought from England.
LINE 19: Enlarged and improved from generation to generation, it stood, like a
LINE 20: baronial castle, upon a slight eminence from which could be surveyed
LINE 21: the large demesne still belonging to the estate, which had shrunk
LINE 22: greatly from its colonial dimensions. While still embracing several
LINE 23: thousand acres, part forest and part cleared land, it had not of late
LINE 24: years been profitable; in spite of which Mr. Delamere, with the
LINE 25: conservatism of his age and caste, had never been able to make up his
LINE 26: mind to part with any considerable portion of it. His grandson, he
LINE 27: imagined, could make the estate pay and yet preserve it in its
LINE 28: integrity. Here, in pleasant weather, surrounded by the scenes which he
LINE 29: loved, old Mr. Delamere spent much of the time during his declining
LINE 30: years.
LINE 31: Dr. Miller had once passed a day at Belleview, upon Mr. Delamere's
LINE 32: invitation. For this old-fashioned gentleman, whose ideals not even
LINE 33: slavery had been able to spoil, regarded himself as a trustee for the
LINE 34: great public, which ought, in his opinion, to take as much pride as he
LINE 35: in the contemplation of this historic landmark. In earlier years Mr.
LINE 36: Delamere had been a practicing lawyer, and had numbered Miller's father
LINE 37: among his clients. He had always been regarded as friendly to the
LINE 38: colored people, and, until age and ill health had driven him from active
LINE 39: life, had taken a lively interest in their advancement since the
LINE 40: abolition of slavery. Upon the public opening of Miller's new hospital,
LINE 41: he had made an effort to be present, and had made a little speech of
LINE 42: approval and encouragement which had manifested his kindliness and given
LINE 43: Miller much pleasure.
LINE 44: It was with the consciousness, therefore, that he was approaching a
LINE 45: friend, as well as Sandy's master, that Miller's mind was chiefly
LINE 46: occupied as his tired horse, scenting the end of his efforts, bore him
LINE 47: with a final burst of speed along the last few rods of the journey; for
LINE 48: the urgency of Miller's errand, involving as it did the issues of life
LINE 49: and death, did not permit him to enjoy the charm of mossy oak or forest
LINE 50: reaches, or even to appreciate the noble front of Belleview House when
LINE 51: it at last loomed up before him.
LINE 52: "Well, William," said Mr. Delamere, as he gave his hand to Miller from
LINE 53: the armchair in which he was seated under the broad and stately portico,
LINE 54: "I didn't expect to see you out here. You'll excuse my not
LINE 55: rising,--I'm none too firm on my legs. Did you see anything of my man
LINE 56: Sandy back there on the road? He ought to have been here by nine
LINE 57: o'clock, and it's now one. Sandy is punctuality itself, and I don't know
LINE 58: how to account for his delay."
LINE 59: Clearly there need be no time wasted in preliminaries. Mr. Delamere had
LINE 60: gone directly to the subject in hand.
LINE 61: "He will not be here to-day, sir," replied Miller. "I have come to you
LINE 62: on his account."
LINE 63: In a few words Miller stated the situation.
LINE 64: "Preposterous!" exclaimed the old gentleman, with more vigor than Miller
LINE 65: had supposed him to possess. "Sandy is absolutely incapable of such a
LINE 66: crime as robbery, to say nothing of murder; and as for the rest, that is
LINE 67: absurd upon the face of it! And so the poor old woman is dead! Well,
LINE 68: well, well! she could not have lived much longer anyway; but Sandy did
LINE 69: not kill her,--it's simply impossible! Why, _I_ raised that boy! He was
LINE 70: born on my place. I'd as soon believe such a thing of my own grandson
LINE 71: as of Sandy! No negro raised by a Delamere would ever commit such a
LINE 72: crime. I really believe, William, that Sandy has the family honor of the
LINE 73: Delameres quite as much at heart as I have. Just tell them I say Sandy
LINE 74: is innocent, and it will be all right."
LINE 75: "I'm afraid, sir," rejoined Miller, who kept his voice up so that the
LINE 76: old gentleman could understand without having it suggested that Miller
LINE 77: knew he was hard of hearing, "that you don't quite appreciate the
LINE 78: situation. _I_ believe Sandy innocent; _you_ believe him innocent; but
LINE 79: there are suspicious circumstances which do not explain themselves, and
LINE 80: the white people of the city believe him guilty, and are going to lynch
LINE 81: him before he has a chance to clear himself."
LINE 82: "Why doesn't he explain the suspicious circumstances?" asked Mr.
LINE 83: Delamere. "Sandy is truthful and can be believed. I would take Sandy's
LINE 84: word as quickly as another man's oath."
LINE 85: "He has no chance to explain," said Miller. "The case is prejudged. A
LINE 86: crime has been committed. Sandy is charged with it. He is black, and
LINE 87: therefore he is guilty. No colored lawyer would be allowed in the jail,
LINE 88: if one should dare to go there. No white lawyer will intervene. He'll
LINE 89: be lynched to-night, without judge, jury, or preacher, unless we can
LINE 90: stave the thing off for a day or two."
LINE 91: "Have you seen my grandson?" asked the old gentleman. "Is he not looking
LINE 92: after Sandy?"
LINE 93: "No, sir. It seems he went down the river this morning to fish, before
LINE 94: the murder was discovered; no one knows just where he has gone, or at
LINE 95: what hour he will return."
LINE 96: "Well, then," said Mr. Delamere, rising from his chair with surprising
LINE 97: vigor, "I shall have to go myself. No faithful servant of mine shall be
LINE 98: hanged for a crime he didn't commit, so long as I have a voice to
LINE 99: speak or a dollar to spend. There'll be no trouble after I get there,
LINE 100: William. The people are naturally wrought up at such a crime. A fine old
LINE 101: woman,--she had some detestable traits, and I was always afraid she
LINE 102: wanted to marry me, but she was of an excellent family and had many good
LINE 103: points,--an old woman of one of the best families, struck down by the
LINE 104: hand of a murderer! You must remember, William, that blood is thicker
LINE 105: than water, and that the provocation is extreme, and that a few hotheads
LINE 106: might easily lose sight of the great principles involved and seek
LINE 107: immediate vengeance, without too much discrimination. But they are good
LINE 108: people, William, and when I have spoken, and they have an opportunity
LINE 109: for the sober second thought, they will do nothing rashly, but will wait
LINE 110: for the operation of the law, which will, of course, clear Sandy."
LINE 111: "I'm sure I hope so," returned Miller. "Shall I try to drive you back,
LINE 112: sir, or will you order your own carriage?"
LINE 113: "My horses are fresher, William, and I'll have them brought around. You
LINE 114: can take the reins, if you will,--I'm rather old to drive,--and my man
LINE 115: will come behind with your buggy."
LINE 116: In a few minutes they set out along the sandy road. Having two fresh
LINE 117: horses, they made better headway than Miller had made coming out, and
LINE 118: reached Wellington easily by three o'clock.
LINE 119: "I think, William," said Mr. Delamere, as they drove into the town,
LINE 120: "that I had first better talk with Sandy. He may be able to explain away
LINE 121: the things that seem to connect him with this atrocious affair; and that
LINE 122: will put me in a better position to talk to other people about it."
LINE 123: Miller drove directly to the county jail. Thirty or forty white men, who
LINE 124: seemed to be casually gathered near the door, closed up when the
LINE 125: carriage approached. The sheriff, who had seen them from the inside,
LINE 126: came to the outer door and spoke to the visitor through a grated wicket.
LINE 127: "Mr. Wemyss," said Mr. Delamere, when he had made his way to the
LINE 128: entrance with the aid of his cane, "I wish to see my servant, Sandy
LINE 129: Campbell, who is said to be in your custody."
LINE 130: The sheriff hesitated. Meantime there was some parleying in low tones
LINE 131: among the crowd outside. No one interfered, however, and in a moment the
LINE 132: door opened sufficiently to give entrance to the old gentleman, after
LINE 133: which it closed quickly and clangorously behind him.
LINE 134: Feeling no desire to linger in the locality, Miller, having seen his
LINE 135: companion enter the jail, drove the carriage round to Mr. Delamere's
LINE 136: house, and leaving it in charge of a servant with instructions to return
LINE 137: for his master in a quarter of an hour, hastened to his own home to meet
LINE 138: Watson and Josh and report the result of his efforts.