LINE 1: Events moved rapidly during the next few days. The reproduction, in the
LINE 2: Chronicle, of the article from the Afro-American Banner, with Carteret's
LINE 3: inflammatory comment, took immediate effect. It touched the Southern
LINE 4: white man in his most sensitive spot. To him such an article was an
LINE 5: insult to white womanhood, and must be resented by some active
LINE 6: steps,--mere words would be no answer at all. To meet words with words
LINE 7: upon such a subject would be to acknowledge the equality of the negro
LINE 8: and his right to discuss or criticise the conduct of the white people.
LINE 9: The colored people became alarmed at the murmurings of the whites, which
LINE 10: seemed to presage a coming storm. A number of them sought to arm
LINE 11: themselves, but ascertained, upon inquiring at the stores, that no white
LINE 12: merchant would sell a negro firearms. Since all the dealers in this sort
LINE 13: of merchandise were white men, the negroes had to be satisfied with
LINE 14: oiling up the old army muskets which some of them possessed, and the few
LINE 15: revolvers with which a small rowdy element generally managed to keep
LINE 16: themselves supplied. Upon an effort being made to purchase firearms from
LINE 17: a Northern city, the express company, controlled by local men, refused
LINE 18: to accept the consignment. The white people, on the other hand, procured
LINE 19: both arms and ammunition in large quantities, and the Wellington Grays
LINE 20: drilled with great assiduity at their armory.
LINE 21: All this went on without any public disturbance of the town's
LINE 22: tranquillity. A stranger would have seen nothing to excite his
LINE 23: curiosity. The white people did their talking among themselves, and
LINE 24: merely grew more distant in their manner toward the colored folks, who
LINE 25: instinctively closed their ranks as the whites drew away. With each day
LINE 26: that passed the feeling grew more tense. The editor of the Afro-American
LINE 27: Banner, whose office had been quietly garrisoned for several nights by
LINE 28: armed negroes, became frightened, and disappeared from the town between
LINE 29: two suns.
LINE 30: The conspirators were jubilant at the complete success of their plans.
LINE 31: It only remained for them to so direct this aroused public feeling that
LINE 32: it might completely accomplish the desired end,--to change the political
LINE 33: complexion of the city government and assure the ascendency of the
LINE 34: whites until the amendment should go into effect. A revolution, and not
LINE 35: a riot, was contemplated.
LINE 36: With this end in view, another meeting was called at Carteret's office.
LINE 37: "We are now ready," announced General Belmont, "for the final act of
LINE 38: this drama. We must decide promptly, or events may run away from us."
LINE 39: "What do you suggest?" asked Carteret.
LINE 40: "Down in the American tropics," continued the general, "they have a way
LINE 41: of doing things. I was in Nicaragua, ten years ago, when Paterno's
LINE 42: revolution drove out Igorroto's government. It was as easy as falling
LINE 43: off a log. Paterno had the arms and the best men. Igorroto was not
LINE 44: looking for trouble, and the guns were at his breast before he knew it.
LINE 45: We have the guns. The negroes are not expecting trouble, and are easy
LINE 46: to manage compared with the fiery mixture that flourishes in the
LINE 47: tropics."
LINE 48: "I should not advocate murder," returned Carteret. "We are animated by
LINE 49: high and holy principles. We wish to right a wrong, to remedy an abuse,
LINE 50: to save our state from anarchy and our race from humiliation. I don't
LINE 51: object to frightening the negroes, but I am opposed to unnecessary
LINE 52: bloodshed."
LINE 53: "I'm not quite so particular," struck in McBane. "They need to be
LINE 54: taught a lesson, and a nigger more or less wouldn't be missed. There's
LINE 55: too many of 'em now."
LINE 56: "Of course," continued Carteret, "if we should decide upon a certain
LINE 57: mode of procedure, and the negroes should resist, a different reasoning
LINE 58: might apply; but I will have no premeditated murder."
LINE 59: "In Central and South America," observed the general reflectively, "none
LINE 60: are hurt except those who get in the way."
LINE 61: "There'll be no niggers hurt," said McBane contemptuously, "unless they
LINE 62: strain themselves running. One white man can chase a hundred of 'em.
LINE 63: I've managed five hundred at a time. I'll pay for burying all the
LINE 64: niggers that are killed."
LINE 65: The conference resulted in a well-defined plan, to be put into operation
LINE 66: the following day, by which the city government was to be wrested from
LINE 67: the Republicans and their negro allies.
LINE 68: "And now," said General Belmont, "while we are cleansing the Augean
LINE 69: stables, we may as well remove the cause as the effect. There are
LINE 70: several negroes too many in this town, which will be much the better
LINE 71: without them. There's that yellow lawyer, Watson. He's altogether too
LINE 72: mouthy, and has too much business. Every nigger that gets into trouble
LINE 73: sends for Watson, and white lawyers, with families to support and social
LINE 74: positions to keep up, are deprived of their legitimate source of
LINE 75: income."
LINE 76: "There's that damn nigger real estate agent," blurted out McBane. "Billy
LINE 77: Kitchen used to get most of the nigger business, but this darky has
LINE 78: almost driven him to the poorhouse. A white business man is entitled to
LINE 79: a living in his own profession and his own home. That nigger don't
LINE 80: belong here nohow. He came from the North a year or two ago, and is hand
LINE 81: in glove with Barber, the nigger editor, which is enough of itself to
LINE 82: damn him. _He'll_ have to go!"
LINE 83: "How about the collector of the port?"
LINE 84: "We'd better not touch him. It would bring the government down upon us,
LINE 85: which we want to avoid. We don't need to worry about the nigger
LINE 86: preachers either. They want to stay here, where the loaves and the
LINE 87: fishes are. We can make 'em write letters to the newspapers justifying
LINE 88: our course, as a condition of their remaining."
LINE 89: "What about Billings?" asked McBane. Billings was the white Republican
LINE 90: mayor. "Is that skunk to be allowed to stay in town?"
LINE 91: "No," returned the general, "every white Republican office-holder ought
LINE 92: to be made to go. This town is only big enough for Democrats, and
LINE 93: negroes who can be taught to keep their place."
LINE 94: "What about the colored doctor," queried McBane, "with the hospital, and
LINE 95: the diamond ring, and the carriage, and the other fallals?"
LINE 96: "I shouldn't interfere with Miller," replied the general decisively.
LINE 97: "He's a very good sort of a negro, doesn't meddle with politics, nor
LINE 98: tread on any one else's toes. His father was a good citizen, which
LINE 99: counts in his favor. He's spending money in the community too, and
LINE 100: contributes to its prosperity."
LINE 101: "That sort of nigger, though, sets a bad example," retorted McBane.
LINE 102: "They make it all the harder to keep the rest of 'em down."
LINE 103: "'One swallow does not make a summer,'" quoted the general. "When we get
LINE 104: things arranged, there'll be no trouble. A stream cannot rise higher
LINE 105: than its fountain, and a smart nigger without a constituency will no
LINE 106: longer be an object of fear. I say, let the doctor alone."
LINE 107: "He'll have to keep mighty quiet, though," muttered McBane
LINE 108: discontentedly. "I don't like smart niggers. I've had to shoot several
LINE 109: of them, in the course of my life."
LINE 110: "Personally, I dislike the man," interposed Carteret, "and if I
LINE 111: consulted my own inclinations, would say expel him with the rest; but my
LINE 112: grievance is a personal one, and to gratify it in that way would be a
LINE 113: loss to the community. I wish to be strictly impartial in this matter,
LINE 114: and to take no step which cannot be entirely justified by a wise regard
LINE 115: for the public welfare."
LINE 116: "What's the use of all this hypocrisy, gentlemen?" sneered McBane.
LINE 117: "Every last one of us has an axe to grind! The major may as well put an
LINE 118: edge on his. We'll never get a better chance to have things our way. If
LINE 119: this nigger doctor annoys the major, we'll run him out with the rest.
LINE 120: This is a white man's country, and a white man's city, and no nigger has
LINE 121: any business here when a white man wants him gone!"
LINE 122: Carteret frowned darkly at this brutal characterization of their
LINE 123: motives. It robbed the enterprise of all its poetry, and put a solemn
LINE 124: act of revolution upon the plane of a mere vulgar theft of power. Even
LINE 125: the general winced.
LINE 126: "I would not consent," he said irritably, "to Miller's being disturbed."
LINE 127: McBane made no further objection.
LINE 128: There was a discreet knock at the door.
LINE 129: "Come in," said Carteret.
LINE 130: Jerry entered. "Mistuh Ellis wants ter speak ter you a minute, suh," he
LINE 131: said.
LINE 132: Carteret excused himself and left the room.
LINE 133: "Jerry," said the general, "you lump of ebony, the sight of you reminds
LINE 134: me! If your master doesn't want you for a minute, step across to Mr.
LINE 135: Brown's and tell him to send me three cocktails."
LINE 136: "Yas, suh," responded Jerry, hesitating. The general had said nothing
LINE 137: about paying.
LINE 138: "And tell him, Jerry, to charge them. I'm short of change to-day."
LINE 139: "Yas, suh; yas, suh," replied Jerry, as he backed out of the presence,
LINE 140: adding, when he had reached the hall: "Dere ain' no change fer Jerry dis
LINE 141: time, sho': I'll jes' make dat _fo_' cocktails, an' de gin'l won't
LINE 142: never know de diffe'nce. I ain' gwine 'cross de road fer nothin', not ef
LINE 143: I knows it."
LINE 144: Half an hour later, the conspirators dispersed. They had fixed the hour
LINE 145: of the proposed revolution, the course to be pursued, the results to be
LINE 146: obtained; but in stating their equation they had overlooked one
LINE 147: factor,--God, or Fate, or whatever one may choose to call the Power that
LINE 148: holds the destinies of man in the hollow of his hand.