LINE 1: Mr. Delamere's coachman, who, in accordance with instructions left by
LINE 2: Miller, had brought the carriage around to the jail and was waiting
LINE 3: anxiously at the nearest corner, drove up with some trepidation as he
LINE 4: saw his master emerge from the prison. The old gentleman entered the
LINE 5: carriage and gave the order to be driven to the office of the Morning
LINE 6: Chronicle. According to Jerry, the porter, whom he encountered at the
LINE 7: door, Carteret was in his office, and Mr. Delamere, with the aid of his
LINE 8: servant, climbed the stairs painfully and found the editor at his desk.
LINE 9: "Carteret," exclaimed Mr. Delamere, "what is all this talk about
LINE 10: lynching my man for murder and robbery and criminal assault? It's
LINE 11: perfectly absurd! The man was raised by me; he has lived in my house
LINE 12: forty years. He has been honest, faithful, and trustworthy. He would no
LINE 13: more be capable of this crime than you would, or my grandson Tom. Sandy
LINE 14: has too much respect for the family to do anything that would reflect
LINE 15: disgrace upon it."
LINE 16: "My dear Mr. Delamere," asked Carteret, with an indulgent smile, "how
LINE 17: could a negro possibly reflect discredit upon a white family? I should
LINE 18: really like to know."
LINE 19: "How, sir? A white family raised him. Like all the negroes, he has been
LINE 20: clay in the hands of the white people. They are what we have made them,
LINE 21: or permitted them to become."
LINE 22: "We are not God, Mr. Delamere! We do not claim to have created
LINE 23: these--masterpieces."
LINE 24: "No; but we thought to overrule God's laws, and we enslaved these people
LINE 25: for our greed, and sought to escape the manstealer's curse by laying to
LINE 26: our souls the flattering unction that we were making of barbarous
LINE 27: negroes civilized and Christian men. If we did not, if instead of making
LINE 28: them Christians we have made some of them brutes, we have only ourselves
LINE 29: to blame, and if these prey upon society, it is our just punishment! But
LINE 30: my negroes, Carteret, were well raised and well behaved. This man is
LINE 31: innocent of this offense, I solemnly affirm, and I want your aid to
LINE 32: secure his safety until a fair trial can be had."
LINE 33: "On your bare word, sir?" asked Carteret, not at all moved by this
LINE 34: outburst.
LINE 35: Old Mr. Delamere trembled with anger, and his withered cheek flushed
LINE 36: darkly, but he restrained his feelings, and answered with an attempt at
LINE 37: calmness:--
LINE 38: "Time was, sir, when the word of a Delamere was held as good as his
LINE 39: bond, and those who questioned it were forced to maintain their
LINE 40: skepticism upon the field of honor. Time was, sir, when the law was
LINE 41: enforced in this state in a manner to command the respect of the world!
LINE 42: Our lawyers, our judges, our courts, were a credit to humanity and
LINE 43: civilization. I fear I have outlasted my epoch,--I have lived to hear of
LINE 44: white men, the most favored of races, the heirs of civilization, the
LINE 45: conservators of liberty, howling like red Indians around a human being
LINE 46: slowly roasting at the stake."
LINE 47: "My dear sir," said Carteret soothingly, "you should undeceive yourself.
LINE 48: This man is no longer your property. The negroes are no longer under our
LINE 49: control, and with their emancipation ceased our responsibility. Their
LINE 50: insolence and disregard for law have reached a point where they must be
LINE 51: sternly rebuked."
LINE 52: "The law," retorted Mr. Delamere, "furnishes a sufficient penalty for
LINE 53: any crime, however heinous, and our code is by no means lenient. To my
LINE 54: old-fashioned notions, death would seem an adequate punishment for any
LINE 55: crime, and torture has been abolished in civilized countries for a
LINE 56: hundred years. It would be better to let a crime go entirely unpunished,
LINE 57: than to use it as a pretext for turning the whole white population into
LINE 58: a mob of primitive savages, dancing in hellish glee around the mangled
LINE 59: body of a man who has never been tried for a crime. All this, however,
LINE 60: is apart from my errand, which is to secure your assistance in heading
LINE 61: off this mob until Sandy can have a fair hearing and an opportunity to
LINE 62: prove his innocence."
LINE 63: "How can I do that, Mr. Delamere?"
LINE 64: "You are editor of the Morning Chronicle. The Chronicle is the leading
LINE 65: newspaper of the city. This morning's issue practically suggested the
LINE 66: mob; the same means will stop it. I will pay the expense of an extra
LINE 67: edition, calling off the mob, on the ground that newly discovered
LINE 68: evidence has shown the prisoner's innocence."
LINE 69: "But where is the evidence?" asked Carteret.
LINE 70: Again Mr. Delamere flushed and trembled. "My evidence, sir! I say the
LINE 71: negro was morally incapable of the crime. A man of forty-five does not
LINE 72: change his nature over-night. He is no more capable of a disgraceful
LINE 73: deed than my grandson would be!"
LINE 74: Carteret smiled sadly.
LINE 75: "I am sorry, Mr. Delamere," he said, "that you should permit yourself to
LINE 76: be so exercised about a worthless scoundrel who has forfeited his right
LINE 77: to live. The proof against him is overwhelming. As to his capability of
LINE 78: crime, we will apply your own test. You have been kept in the dark too
LINE 79: long, Mr. Delamere,--indeed, we all have,--about others as well as this
LINE 80: negro. Listen, sir: last night, at the Clarendon Club, Tom Delamere was
LINE 81: caught cheating outrageously at cards. He had been suspected for some
LINE 82: time; a trap was laid for him, and be fell into it. Out of regard for
LINE 83: you and for my family, he has been permitted to resign quietly, with the
LINE 84: understanding that he first pay off his debts, which are considerable."
LINE 85: Mr. Delamere's face, which had taken on some color in the excitement of
LINE 86: the interview, had gradually paled to a chalky white while Carteret was
LINE 87: speaking. His head sunk forward; already an old man, he seemed to have
LINE 88: aged ten years in but little more than as many seconds.
LINE 89: "Can this be true?" he demanded in a hoarse whisper. "Is it--entirely
LINE 90: authentic?"
LINE 91: "True as gospel; true as it is that Mrs. Ochiltree has been murdered,
LINE 92: and that this negro killed her. Ellis was at the club a few minutes
LINE 93: after the affair happened, and learned the facts from one of the
LINE 94: participants. Tom made no attempt at denial. We have kept the matter out
LINE 95: of the other papers, and I would have spared your feelings,--I surely
LINE 96: would not wish to wound them,--but the temptation proved too strong for
LINE 97: me, and it seemed the only way to convince you: it was your own test. If
LINE 98: a gentleman of a distinguished name and an honorable ancestry, with all
LINE 99: the restraining forces of social position surrounding him, to hold him
LINE 100: in check, can stoop to dishonor, what is the improbability of an
LINE 101: illiterate negro's being at least capable of crime?"
LINE 102: "Enough, sir," said the old gentleman. "You have proved enough. My
LINE 103: grandson may be a scoundrel,--I can see, in the light of this
LINE 104: revelation, how he might be; and he seems not to have denied it. I
LINE 105: maintain, nevertheless, that my man Sandy is innocent of the charge
LINE 106: against him. He has denied it, and it has not been proved. Carteret, I
LINE 107: owe that negro my life; he, and his father before him, have served me
LINE 108: and mine faithfully and well. I cannot see him killed like a dog,
LINE 109: without judge or jury,--no, not even if he were guilty, which I do not
LINE 110: believe!"
LINE 111: Carteret felt a twinge of remorse for the pain he had inflicted upon
LINE 112: this fine old man, this ideal gentleman of the ideal past,--the past
LINE 113: which he himself so much admired and regretted. He would like to spare
LINE 114: his old friend any further agitation; he was in a state of health where
LINE 115: too great excitement might prove fatal. But how could he? The negro was
LINE 116: guilty, and sure to die sooner or later. He had not meant to interfere,
LINE 117: and his intervention might be fruitless.
LINE 118: "Mr. Delamere," he said gently, "there is but one way to gain time. You
LINE 119: say the negro is innocent. Appearances are against him. The only way to
LINE 120: clear him is to produce the real criminal, or prove an alibi. If you, or
LINE 121: some other white man of equal standing, could swear that the negro was
LINE 122: in your presence last night at any hour when this crime could have taken
LINE 123: place, it might be barely possible to prevent the lynching for the
LINE 124: present; and when he is tried, which will probably be not later than
LINE 125: next week, he will have every opportunity to defend himself, with you
LINE 126: to see that he gets no less than justice. I think it can be managed,
LINE 127: though there is still a doubt. I will do my best, for your sake, Mr.
LINE 128: Delamere,--solely for your sake, be it understood, and not for that of
LINE 129: the negro, in whom you are entirely deceived."
LINE 130: "I shall not examine your motives, Carteret," replied the other, "if you
LINE 131: can bring about what I desire."
LINE 132: "Whatever is done," added Carteret, "must be done quickly. It is now
LINE 133: four o'clock; no one can answer for what may happen after seven. If he
LINE 134: can prove an alibi, there may yet be time to save him. White men might
LINE 135: lynch a negro on suspicion; they would not kill a man who was proven, by
LINE 136: the word of white men, to be entirely innocent."
LINE 137: "I do not know," returned Mr. Delamere, shaking his head sadly. "After
LINE 138: what you have told me, it is no longer safe to assume what white men
LINE 139: will or will not do;--what I have learned here has shaken my faith in
LINE 140: humanity. I am going away, but shall return in a short time. Shall I
LINE 141: find you here?"
LINE 142: "I will await your return," said Carteret.
LINE 143: He watched Mr. Delamere pityingly as the old man moved away on the arm
LINE 144: of the coachman waiting in the hall. He did not believe that Mr.
LINE 145: Delamere could prove an alibi for his servant, and without some positive
LINE 146: proof the negro would surely die,--as he well deserved to die.