LINE 1: Mr. Ellis was vaguely uncomfortable. In the first excitement following
LINE 2: the discovery of the crime, he had given his bit of evidence, and had
LINE 3: shared the universal indignation against the murderer. When public
LINE 4: feeling took definite shape in the intention to lynch the prisoner,
LINE 5: Ellis felt a sudden sense of responsibility growing upon himself. When
LINE 6: he learned, an hour later, that it was proposed to burn the negro, his
LINE 7: part in the affair assumed a still graver aspect; for his had been the
LINE 8: final word to fix the prisoner's guilt.
LINE 9: Ellis did not believe in lynch law. He had argued against it, more than
LINE 10: once, in private conversation, and had written several editorials
LINE 11: against the practice, while in charge of the Morning Chronicle during
LINE 12: Major Carteret's absence. A young man, however, and merely representing
LINE 13: another, he had not set up as a reformer, taking rather the view that
LINE 14: this summary method of punishing crime, with all its possibilities of
LINE 15: error, to say nothing of the resulting disrespect of the law and
LINE 16: contempt for the time-honored methods of establishing guilt, was a mere
LINE 17: temporary symptom of the unrest caused by the unsettled relations of the
LINE 18: two races at the South. There had never before been any special need for
LINE 19: any vigorous opposition to lynch law, so far as the community was
LINE 20: concerned, for there had not been a lynching in Wellington since Ellis
LINE 21: had come there, eight years before, from a smaller town, to seek a place
LINE 22: for himself in the world of action. Twenty years before, indeed, there
LINE 23: had been wild doings, during the brief Ku-Klux outbreak, but that was
LINE 24: before Ellis's time,--or at least when he was but a child. He had come
LINE 25: of a Quaker family,--the modified Quakers of the South,--and while
LINE 26: sharing in a general way the Southern prejudice against the negro, his
LINE 27: prejudices had been tempered by the peaceful tenets of his father's
LINE 28: sect. His father had been a Whig, and a non-slaveholder; and while he
LINE 29: had gone with the South in the civil war so far as a man of peace could
LINE 30: go, he had not done so for love of slavery.
LINE 31: As the day wore on, Ellis's personal responsibility for the intended
LINE 32: _auto-da-fé_ bore more heavily upon him. Suppose he had been wrong? He
LINE 33: had seen the accused negro; he had recognized him by his clothes, his
LINE 34: whiskers, his spectacles, and his walk; but he had also seen another
LINE 35: man, who resembled Sandy so closely that but for the difference in their
LINE 36: clothes, he was forced to acknowledge, he could not have told them
LINE 37: apart. Had he not seen the first man, he would have sworn with even
LINE 38: greater confidence that the second was Sandy. There had been, he
LINE 39: recalled, about one of the men--he had not been then nor was he now able
LINE 40: to tell which--something vaguely familiar, and yet seemingly discordant
LINE 41: to whichever of the two it was, or, as it seemed to him now, to any man
LINE 42: of that race. His mind reverted to the place where he had last seen
LINE 43: Sandy, and then a sudden wave of illumination swept over him, and filled
LINE 44: him with a thrill of horror. The cakewalk,--the dancing,--the
LINE 45: speech,--they were not Sandy's at all, nor any negro's! It was a white
LINE 46: man who had stood in the light of the street lamp, so that the casual
LINE 47: passer-by might see and recognize in him old Mr. Delamere's servant. The
LINE 48: scheme was a dastardly one, and worthy of a heart that was something
LINE 49: worse than weak and vicious.
LINE 50: Ellis resolved that the negro should not, if he could prevent it, die
LINE 51: for another's crime; but what proof had he himself to offer in support
LINE 52: of his theory? Then again, if he denounced Tom Delamere as the murderer,
LINE 53: it would involve, in all probability, the destruction of his own hopes
LINE 54: with regard to Clara. Of course she could not marry Delamere after the
LINE 55: disclosure,--the disgraceful episode at the club would have been enough
LINE 56: to make that reasonably certain; it had put a nail in Delamere's coffin,
LINE 57: but this crime had driven it in to the head and clinched it. On the
LINE 58: other hand, would Miss Pemberton ever speak again to the man who had
LINE 59: been the instrument of bringing disgrace upon the family? Spies,
LINE 60: detectives, police officers, may be useful citizens, but they are rarely
LINE 61: pleasant company for other people. We fee the executioner, but we do not
LINE 62: touch his bloody hand. We might feel a certain tragic admiration for
LINE 63: Brutus condemning his sons to death, but we would scarcely invite Brutus
LINE 64: to dinner after the event. It would harrow our feelings too much.
LINE 65: Perhaps, thought Ellis, there might be a way out of the dilemma. It
LINE 66: might be possible to save this innocent negro without, for the time
LINE 67: being, involving Delamere. He believed that murder will out, but it need
LINE 68: not be through his initiative. He determined to go to the jail and
LINE 69: interview the prisoner, who might give such an account of himself as
LINE 70: would establish his innocence beyond a doubt. If so, Ellis would exert
LINE 71: himself to stem the tide of popular fury. If, as a last resort, he
LINE 72: could save Sandy only by denouncing Delamere, he would do his duty, let
LINE 73: it cost him what it might.
LINE 74: The gravity of his errand was not lessened by what he saw and heard on
LINE 75: the way to the jail. The anger of the people was at a white heat. A
LINE 76: white woman had been assaulted and murdered by a brutal negro. Neither
LINE 77: advanced age, nor high social standing, had been able to protect her
LINE 78: from the ferocity of a black savage. Her sex, which should have been her
LINE 79: shield and buckler, had made her an easy mark for the villainy of a
LINE 80: black brute. To take the time to try him would be a criminal waste of
LINE 81: public money. To hang him would be too slight a punishment for so
LINE 82: dastardly a crime. An example must be made.
LINE 83: Already the preparations were under way for the impending execution. A
LINE 84: T-rail from the railroad yard had been procured, and men were burying it
LINE 85: in the square before the jail. Others were bringing chains, and a load
LINE 86: of pine wood was piled in convenient proximity. Some enterprising
LINE 87: individual had begun the erection of seats from which, for a pecuniary
LINE 88: consideration, the spectacle might be the more easily and comfortably
LINE 89: viewed.
LINE 90: Ellis was stopped once or twice by persons of his acquaintance. From one
LINE 91: he learned that the railroads would run excursions from the neighboring
LINE 92: towns in order to bring spectators to the scene; from another that the
LINE 93: burning was to take place early in the evening, so that the children
LINE 94: might not be kept up beyond their usual bedtime. In one group that he
LINE 95: passed he heard several young men discussing the question of which
LINE 96: portions of the negro's body they would prefer for souvenirs. Ellis
LINE 97: shuddered and hastened forward. Whatever was to be done must be done
LINE 98: quickly, or it would be too late. He saw that already it would require a
LINE 99: strong case in favor of the accused to overcome the popular verdict.
LINE 100: Going up the steps of the jail, he met Mr. Delamere, who was just coming
LINE 101: out, after a fruitless interview with Sandy.
LINE 102: "Mr. Ellis," said the old gentleman, who seemed greatly agitated, "this
LINE 103: is monstrous!"
LINE 104: "It is indeed, sir!" returned the younger man. "I mean to stop it if I
LINE 105: can. The negro did not kill Mrs. Ochiltree."
LINE 106: Mr. Delamere looked at Ellis keenly, and, as Ellis recalled afterwards,
LINE 107: there was death in his eyes. Unable to draw a syllable from Sandy, he
LINE 108: had found his servant's silence more eloquent than words. Ellis felt a
LINE 109: presentiment that this affair, however it might terminate, would be
LINE 110: fatal to this fine old man, whom the city could ill spare, in spite of
LINE 111: his age and infirmities.
LINE 112: "Mr. Ellis," asked Mr. Delamere, in a voice which trembled with
LINE 113: ill-suppressed emotion, "do you know who killed her?"
LINE 114: Ellis felt a surging pity for his old friend; but every step that he had
LINE 115: taken toward the jail had confirmed and strengthened his own resolution
LINE 116: that this contemplated crime, which he dimly felt to be far more
LINE 117: atrocious than that of which Sandy was accused, in that it involved a
LINE 118: whole community rather than one vicious man, should be stopped at any
LINE 119: cost. Deplorable enough had the negro been guilty, it became, in view of
LINE 120: his certain innocence, an unspeakable horror, which for all time would
LINE 121: cover the city with infamy. "Mr. Delamere," he replied, looking the
LINE 122: elder man squarely in the eyes, "I think I do,--and I am very sorry."
LINE 123: "And who was it, Mr. Ellis?"
LINE 124: He put the question hopelessly, as though the answer were a foregone
LINE 125: conclusion.
LINE 126: "I do not wish to say at present," replied Ellis, with a remorseful
LINE 127: pang, "unless it becomes absolutely necessary, to save the negro's life.
LINE 128: Accusations are dangerous,--as this case proves,--unless the proof, be
LINE 129: certain."
LINE 130: For a moment it seemed as though Mr. Delamere would collapse upon the
LINE 131: spot. Rallying almost instantly, however, he took the arm which Ellis
LINE 132: involuntarily offered, and said with an effort:--
LINE 133: "Mr. Ellis, you are a gentleman whom it is an honor to know. If you have
LINE 134: time, I wish you would go with me to my house,--I can hardly trust
LINE 135: myself alone,--and thence to the Chronicle office. This thing shall be
LINE 136: stopped, and you will help me stop it."
LINE 137: It required but a few minutes to cover the half mile that lay between
LINE 138: the prison and Mr. Delamere's residence.