LINE 1: Miller knocked at the door. There was no response. He went round to the
LINE 2: rear of the house. The dog had slunk behind the woodpile. Miller knocked
LINE 3: again, at the back door, and, receiving no reply, called aloud.
LINE 4: "Mrs. Butler! It is I, Dr. Miller. Is my wife here?"
LINE 5: The slats of a near-by blind opened cautiously.
LINE 6: "Is it really you, Dr. Miller?"
LINE 7: "Yes, Mrs. Butler. I am looking for my wife and child,--are they here?"
LINE 8: "No, sir; she became alarmed about you, soon after the shooting
LINE 9: commenced, and I could not keep her. She left for home half an hour ago.
LINE 10: It is coming on dusk, and she and the child are so near white that she
LINE 11: did not expect to be molested."
LINE 12: "Which way did she go?"
LINE 13: "She meant to go by the main street. She thought it would be less
LINE 14: dangerous than the back streets. I tried to get her to stay here, but
LINE 15: she was frantic about you, and nothing I could say would keep her. Is
LINE 16: the riot almost over, Dr. Miller? Do you think they will murder us all,
LINE 17: and burn down our houses?"
LINE 18: "God knows," replied Miller, with a groan. "But I must find her, if I
LINE 19: lose my own life in the attempt."
LINE 20: Surely, he thought, Janet would be safe. The white people of Wellington
LINE 21: were not savages; or at least their temporary reversion to savagery
LINE 22: would not go as far as to include violence to delicate women and
LINE 23: children. Then there flashed into his mind Josh Green's story of his
LINE 24: "silly" mother, who for twenty years had walked the earth as a child, as
LINE 25: the result of one night's terror, and his heart sank within him.
LINE 26: Miller realized that his buggy, by attracting attention, had been a
LINE 27: hindrance rather than a help in his progress across the city. In order
LINE 28: to follow his wife, he must practically retrace his steps over the very
LINE 29: route he had come. Night was falling. It would be easier to cross the
LINE 30: town on foot. In the dusk his own color, slight in the daytime, would
LINE 31: not attract attention, and by dodging in the shadows he might avoid
LINE 32: those who might wish to intercept him. But he must reach Janet and the
LINE 33: boy at any risk. He had not been willing to throw his life away
LINE 34: hopelessly, but he would cheerfully have sacrificed it for those whom he
LINE 35: loved.
LINE 36: He had gone but a short distance, and had not yet reached the centre of
LINE 37: mob activity, when he intercepted a band of negro laborers from the
LINE 38: cotton compress, with big Josh Green at their head.
LINE 39: "Hello, doctuh!" cried Josh, "does you wan' ter jine us?"
LINE 40: "I'm looking for my wife and child, Josh. They're somewhere in this
LINE 41: den of murderers. Have any of you seen them?"
LINE 42: No one had seen them.
LINE 43: "You men are running a great risk," said Miller. "You are rushing on to
LINE 44: certain death."
LINE 45: "Well, suh, maybe we is; but we're gwine ter die fightin'. Dey say de
LINE 46: w'ite folks is gwine ter bu'n all de cullud schools an' chu'ches, an'
LINE 47: kill all de niggers dey kin ketch. Dey're gwine ter bu'n yo' new
LINE 48: hospittle, ef somebody don' stop 'em."
LINE 49: "Josh--men--you are throwing your lives away. It is a fever; it will
LINE 50: wear off to-morrow, or to-night. They'll not burn the schoolhouses, nor
LINE 51: the hospital--they are not such fools, for they benefit the community;
LINE 52: and they'll only kill the colored people who resist them. Every one of
LINE 53: you with a gun or a pistol carries his death warrant in his own hand.
LINE 54: I'd rather see the hospital burn than have one of you lose his life.
LINE 55: Resistance only makes the matter worse,--the odds against you are too
LINE 56: long."
LINE 57: "Things can't be any wuss, doctuh," replied one of the crowd sturdily.
LINE 58: "A gun is mo' dange'ous ter de man in front of it dan ter de man behin'
LINE 59: it. Dey're gwine ter kill us anyhow; an' we're tired,--we read de
LINE 60: newspapers,--an' we're tired er bein' shot down like dogs, widout jedge
LINE 61: er jury. We'd ruther die fightin' dan be stuck like pigs in a pen!"
LINE 62: "God help you!" said Miller. "As for me, I must find my wife and child."
LINE 63: "Good-by, doctuh," cried Josh, brandishing a huge knife. "'Member 'bout
LINE 64: de ole 'oman, ef you lives thoo dis. Don' fergit de headbo'd an' de
LINE 65: footbo'd, an' a silver plate on de coffin, ef dere's money ernuff."
LINE 66: They went their way, and Miller hurried on. They might resist attack; he
LINE 67: thought it extremely unlikely that they would begin it; but he knew
LINE 68: perfectly well that the mere knowledge that some of the negroes
LINE 69: contemplated resistance would only further inflame the infuriated
LINE 70: whites. The colored men might win a momentary victory, though it was
LINE 71: extremely doubtful; and they would as surely reap the harvest later on.
LINE 72: The qualities which in a white man would win the applause of the world
LINE 73: would in a negro be taken as the marks of savagery. So thoroughly
LINE 74: diseased was public opinion in matters of race that the negro who died
LINE 75: for the common rights of humanity might look for no meed of admiration
LINE 76: or glory. At such a time, in the white man's eyes, a negro's courage
LINE 77: would be mere desperation; his love of liberty, a mere animal dislike of
LINE 78: restraint. Every finer human instinct would be interpreted in terms of
LINE 79: savagery. Or, if forced to admire, they would none the less repress.
LINE 80: They would applaud his courage while they stretched his neck, or carried
LINE 81: off the fragments of his mangled body as souvenirs, in much the same way
LINE 82: that savages preserve the scalps or eat the hearts of their enemies.
LINE 83: But concern for the fate of Josh and his friends occupied only a
LINE 84: secondary place in Miller's mind for the moment. His wife and child were
LINE 85: somewhere ahead of him. He pushed on. He had covered about a quarter of
LINE 86: a mile more, and far down the street could see the signs of greater
LINE 87: animation, when he came upon the body of a woman lying upon the
LINE 88: sidewalk. In the dusk he had almost stumbled over it, and his heart came
LINE 89: up in his mouth. A second glance revealed that it could not be his wife.
LINE 90: It was a fearful portent, however, of what her fate might be. The "war"
LINE 91: had reached the women and children. Yielding to a professional instinct,
LINE 92: he stooped, and saw that the prostrate form was that of old Aunt Jane
LINE 93: Letlow. She was not yet quite dead, and as Miller, with a tender touch,
LINE 94: placed her head in a more comfortable position, her lips moved with a
LINE 95: last lingering flicker of consciousness:--
LINE 96: "Comin', missis, comin'!"
LINE 97: Mammy Jane had gone to join the old mistress upon whose memory her
LINE 98: heart was fixed; and yet not all her reverence for her old mistress, nor
LINE 99: all her deference to the whites, nor all their friendship for her, had
LINE 100: been able to save her from this raging devil of race hatred which
LINE 101: momentarily possessed the town.
LINE 102: Perceiving that he could do no good, Miller hastened onward, sick at
LINE 103: heart. Whenever he saw a party of white men approaching,--these brave
LINE 104: reformers never went singly,--he sought concealment in the shadow of a
LINE 105: tree or the shrubbery in some yard until they had passed. He had covered
LINE 106: about two thirds of the distance homeward, when his eyes fell upon a
LINE 107: group beneath a lamp-post, at sight of which he turned pale with horror,
LINE 108: and rushed forward with a terrible cry.