LINE 1: Mrs. Carteret awoke, with a start, from a troubled dream. She had been
LINE 2: sailing across a sunlit sea, in a beautiful boat, her child lying on a
LINE 3: bright-colored cushion at her feet. Overhead the swelling sail served as
LINE 4: an awning to keep off the sun's rays, which far ahead were reflected
LINE 5: with dazzling brilliancy from the shores of a golden island. Her son,
LINE 6: she dreamed, was a fairy prince, and yonder lay his kingdom, to which he
LINE 7: was being borne, lying there at her feet, in this beautiful boat, across
LINE 8: the sunlit sea.
LINE 9: Suddenly and without warning the sky was overcast. A squall struck the
LINE 10: boat and tore away the sail. In the distance a huge billow--a great
LINE 11: white wall of water--came sweeping toward their frail craft, threatening
LINE 12: it with instant destruction. She clasped her child to her bosom, and a
LINE 13: moment later found herself struggling in the sea, holding the child's
LINE 14: head above the water. As she floated there, as though sustained by some
LINE 15: unseen force, she saw in the distance a small boat approaching over the
LINE 16: storm-tossed waves. Straight toward her it came, and she had reached out
LINE 17: her hand to grasp its side, when the rower looked back, and she saw that
LINE 18: it was her sister. The recognition had been mutual. With a sharp
LINE 19: movement of one oar the boat glided by, leaving her clutching at the
LINE 20: empty air. She felt her strength begin to fail. Despairingly she
LINE 21: signaled with her disengaged hand; but the rower, after one mute,
LINE 22: reproachful glance, rowed on. Mrs. Carteret's strength grew less and
LINE 23: less. The child became heavy as lead. Herself floating in the water, as
LINE 24: though it were her native element, she could no longer support the
LINE 25: child. Lower and lower it sank,--she was powerless to save it or to
LINE 26: accompany it,--until, gasping wildly for breath, it threw up its little
LINE 27: hands and sank, the cruel water gurgling over its head,--when she awoke
LINE 28: with a start and a chill, and lay there trembling for several minutes
LINE 29: before she heard little Dodie in his crib, breathing heavily.
LINE 30: She rose softly, went to the crib, and changed the child's position to
LINE 31: an easier one. He breathed more freely, and she went back to bed, but
LINE 32: not to sleep.
LINE 33: She had tried to put aside the distressing questions raised by the
LINE 34: discovery of her father's will and the papers accompanying it. Why
LINE 35: should she be burdened with such a responsibility, at this late day,
LINE 36: when the touch of time had well-nigh healed these old sores? Surely, God
LINE 37: had put his curse not alone upon the slave, but upon the stealer of men!
LINE 38: With other good people she had thanked Him that slavery was no more, and
LINE 39: that those who once had borne its burden upon their consciences could
LINE 40: stand erect and feel that they themselves were free. The weed had been
LINE 41: cut down, but its roots remained, deeply imbedded in the soil, to spring
LINE 42: up and trouble a new generation. Upon her weak shoulders was placed the
LINE 43: burden of her father's weakness, her father's folly. It was left to her
LINE 44: to acknowledge or not this shameful marriage and her sister's rights in
LINE 45: their father's estate.
LINE 46: Balancing one consideration against another, she had almost decided
LINE 47: that she might ignore this tie. To herself, Olivia Merkell,--Olivia
LINE 48: Carteret,--the stigma of base birth would have meant social ostracism,
LINE 49: social ruin, the averted face, the finger of pity or of scorn. All the
LINE 50: traditional weight of public disapproval would have fallen upon her as
LINE 51: the unhappy fruit of an unblessed union. To this other woman it could
LINE 52: have had no such significance,--it had been the lot of her race. To
LINE 53: them, twenty-five years before, sexual sin had never been imputed as
LINE 54: more than a fault. She had lost nothing by her supposed illegitimacy;
LINE 55: she would gain nothing by the acknowledgment of her mother's marriage.
LINE 56: On the other hand, what would be the effect of this revelation upon Mrs.
LINE 57: Carteret herself? To have it known that her father had married a negress
LINE 58: would only be less dreadful than to have it appear that he had committed
LINE 59: some terrible crime. It was a crime now, by the laws of every Southern
LINE 60: State, for white and colored persons to intermarry. She shuddered before
LINE 61: the possibility that at some time in the future some person, none too
LINE 62: well informed, might learn that her father had married a colored woman,
LINE 63: and might assume that she, Olivia Carteret, or her child, had sprung
LINE 64: from this shocking _mésalliance_,--a fate to which she would willingly
LINE 65: have preferred death. No, this marriage must never be made known; the
LINE 66: secret should remain buried forever in her own heart!
LINE 67: But there still remained the question of her father's property and her
LINE 68: father's will. This woman was her father's child,--of that there could
LINE 69: be no doubt, it was written in her features no less than in her father's
LINE 70: will. As his lawful child,--of which, alas! there could also be no
LINE 71: question,--she was entitled by law to half his estate. Mrs. Carteret's
LINE 72: problem had sunk from the realm of sentiment to that of material things,
LINE 73: which, curiously enough, she found much more difficult. For, while the
LINE 74: negro, by the traditions of her people, was barred from the world of
LINE 75: sentiment, his rights of property were recognized. The question had
LINE 76: become, with Mrs. Carteret, a question of _meum_ and _tuum_. Had the
LINE 77: girl Janet been poor, ignorant, or degraded, as might well have been her
LINE 78: fate, Mrs. Carteret might have felt a vicarious remorse for her aunt's
LINE 79: suppression of the papers; but fate had compensated Janet for the loss;
LINE 80: she had been educated, she had married well; she had not suffered for
LINE 81: lack of the money of which she had been defrauded, and did not need it
LINE 82: now. She had a child, it is true, but this child's career would be so
LINE 83: circumscribed by the accident of color that too much wealth would only
LINE 84: be a source of unhappiness; to her own child, on the contrary, it would
LINE 85: open every door of life.
LINE 86: It would be too lengthy a task to follow the mind and conscience of this
LINE 87: much-tried lady in their intricate workings upon this difficult problem;
LINE 88: for she had a mind as logical as any woman's, and a conscience which she
LINE 89: wished to keep void of offense. She had to confront a situation
LINE 90: involving the element of race, upon which the moral standards of her
LINE 91: people were hopelessly confused. Mrs. Carteret reached the conclusion,
LINE 92: ere daylight dawned, that she would be silent upon the subject of her
LINE 93: father's second marriage. Neither party had wished it known,--neither
LINE 94: Julia nor her father,--and she would respect her father's wishes. To act
LINE 95: otherwise would be to defeat his will, to make known what he had
LINE 96: carefully concealed, and to give Janet a claim of title to one half her
LINE 97: father's estate, while he had only meant her to have the ten thousand
LINE 98: dollars named in the will.
LINE 99: By the same reasoning, she must carry out her father's will in respect
LINE 100: to this bequest. Here there was another difficulty. The mining
LINE 101: investment into which they had entered shortly after the birth of little
LINE 102: Dodie had tied up so much of her property that it would have been
LINE 103: difficult to procure ten thousand dollars immediately; while a demand
LINE 104: for half the property at once would mean bankruptcy and ruin. Moreover,
LINE 105: upon what ground could she offer her sister any sum of money whatever?
LINE 106: So sudden a change of heart, after so many years of silence, would raise
LINE 107: the presumption of some right on the part of Janet in her father's
LINE 108: estate. Suspicion once aroused, it might be possible to trace this
LINE 109: hidden marriage, and establish it by legal proof. The marriage once
LINE 110: verified, the claim for half the estate could not be denied. She could
LINE 111: not plead her father's will to the contrary, for this would be to
LINE 112: acknowledge the suppression of the will, in itself a criminal act.
LINE 113: There was, however, a way of escape. This hospital which had recently
LINE 114: been opened was the personal property of her sister's husband. Some time
LINE 115: in the future, when their investments matured, she would present to the
LINE 116: hospital a sum of money equal to the amount her father had meant his
LINE 117: colored daughter to have. Thus indirectly both her father's will and her
LINE 118: own conscience would be satisfied.
LINE 119: Mrs. Carteret had reached this comfortable conclusion, and was falling
LINE 120: asleep, when her attention was again drawn by her child's breathing. She
LINE 121: took it in her own arms and soon fell asleep.
LINE 122: "By the way, Olivia," said the major, when leaving the house next
LINE 123: morning for the office, "if you have any business down town to-day,
LINE 124: transact it this forenoon. Under no circumstances must you or Clara or
LINE 125: the baby leave the house after midday."
LINE 126: "Why, what's the matter, Phil?"
LINE 127: "Nothing to alarm you, except that there may be a little political
LINE 128: demonstration which may render the streets unsafe. You are not to say
LINE 129: anything about it where the servants might hear."
LINE 130: "Will there be any danger for you, Phil?" she demanded with alarm.
LINE 131: "Not the slightest, Olivia dear. No one will be harmed; but it is best
LINE 132: for ladies and children to stay indoors."
LINE 133: Mrs. Carteret's nerves were still more or less unstrung from her mental
LINE 134: struggles of the night, and the memory of her dream came to her like a
LINE 135: dim foreboding of misfortune. As though in sympathy with its mother's
LINE 136: feelings, the baby did not seem as well as usual. The new nurse was by
LINE 137: no means an ideal nurse,--Mammy Jane understood the child much better.
LINE 138: If there should be any trouble with the negroes, toward which her
LINE 139: husband's remark seemed to point,--she knew the general political
LINE 140: situation, though not informed in regard to her husband's plans,--she
LINE 141: would like to have Mammy Jane near her, where the old nurse might be
LINE 142: protected from danger or alarm.
LINE 143: With this end in view she dispatched the nurse, shortly after breakfast,
LINE 144: to Mammy Jane's house in the negro settlement on the other side of the
LINE 145: town, with a message asking the old woman to come immediately to Mrs.
LINE 146: Carteret's. Unfortunately, Mammy Jane had gone to visit a sick woman in
LINE 147: the country, and was not expected to return for several hours.