LINE 1: In a village of La Mancha, the name of which I have no desire to call
LINE 2: to mind, there lived not long since one of those gentlemen that keep a
LINE 3: lance in the lance-rack, an old buckler, a lean hack, and a greyhound
LINE 4: for coursing. An olla of rather more beef than mutton, a salad on most
LINE 5: nights, scraps on Saturdays, lentils on Fridays, and a pigeon or so
LINE 6: extra on Sundays, made away with three-quarters of his income. The rest
LINE 7: of it went in a doublet of fine cloth and velvet breeches and shoes to
LINE 8: match for holidays, while on week-days he made a brave figure in his
LINE 9: best homespun. He had in his house a housekeeper past forty, a niece
LINE 10: under twenty, and a lad for the field and market-place, who used to
LINE 11: saddle the hack as well as handle the bill-hook. The age of this
LINE 12: gentleman of ours was bordering on fifty; he was of a hardy habit,
LINE 13: spare, gaunt-featured, a very early riser and a great sportsman. They
LINE 14: will have it his surname was Quixada or Quesada (for here there is some
LINE 15: difference of opinion among the authors who write on the subject),
LINE 16: although from reasonable conjectures it seems plain that he was called
LINE 17: Quexana. This, however, is of but little importance to our tale; it
LINE 18: will be enough not to stray a hair's breadth from the truth in the
LINE 19: telling of it.
LINE 20: You must know, then, that the above-named gentleman whenever he was at
LINE 21: leisure (which was mostly all the year round) gave himself up to
LINE 22: reading books of chivalry with such ardour and avidity that he almost
LINE 23: entirely neglected the pursuit of his field-sports, and even the
LINE 24: management of his property; and to such a pitch did his eagerness and
LINE 25: infatuation go that he sold many an acre of tillageland to buy books of
LINE 26: chivalry to read, and brought home as many of them as he could get. But
LINE 27: of all there were none he liked so well as those of the famous
LINE 28: Feliciano de Silva's composition, for their lucidity of style and
LINE 29: complicated conceits were as pearls in his sight, particularly when in
LINE 30: his reading he came upon courtships and cartels, where he often found
LINE 31: passages like "_the reason of the unreason with which my reason is
LINE 32: afflicted so weakens my reason that with reason I murmur at your
LINE 33: beauty;" or again, "the high heavens, that of your divinity divinely
LINE 34: fortify you with the stars, render you deserving of the desert your
LINE 35: greatness deserves_." Over conceits of this sort the poor gentleman
LINE 36: lost his wits, and used to lie awake striving to understand them and
LINE 37: worm the meaning out of them; what Aristotle himself could not have
LINE 38: made out or extracted had he come to life again for that special
LINE 39: purpose. He was not at all easy about the wounds which Don Belianis
LINE 40: gave and took, because it seemed to him that, great as were the
LINE 41: surgeons who had cured him, he must have had his face and body covered
LINE 42: all over with seams and scars. He commended, however, the author's way
LINE 43: of ending his book with the promise of that interminable adventure, and
LINE 44: many a time was he tempted to take up his pen and finish it properly as
LINE 45: is there proposed, which no doubt he would have done, and made a
LINE 46: successful piece of work of it too, had not greater and more absorbing
LINE 47: thoughts prevented him.
LINE 48: Many an argument did he have with the curate of his village (a learned
LINE 49: man, and a graduate of Siguenza) as to which had been the better
LINE 50: knight, Palmerin of England or Amadis of Gaul. Master Nicholas, the
LINE 51: village barber, however, used to say that neither of them came up to
LINE 52: the Knight of Phœbus, and that if there was any that could compare with
LINE 53: _him_ it was Don Galaor, the brother of Amadis of Gaul, because he had
LINE 54: a spirit that was equal to every occasion, and was no finikin knight,
LINE 55: nor lachrymose like his brother, while in the matter of valour he was
LINE 56: not a whit behind him. In short, he became so absorbed in his books
LINE 57: that he spent his nights from sunset to sunrise, and his days from dawn
LINE 58: to dark, poring over them; and what with little sleep and much reading
LINE 59: his brains got so dry that he lost his wits. His fancy grew full of
LINE 60: what he used to read about in his books, enchantments, quarrels,
LINE 61: battles, challenges, wounds, wooings, loves, agonies, and all sorts of
LINE 62: impossible nonsense; and it so possessed his mind that the whole fabric
LINE 63: of invention and fancy he read of was true, that to him no history in
LINE 64: the world had more reality in it. He used to say the Cid Ruy Diaz was a
LINE 65: very good knight, but that he was not to be compared with the Knight of
LINE 66: the Burning Sword who with one back-stroke cut in half two fierce and
LINE 67: monstrous giants. He thought more of Bernardo del Carpio because at
LINE 68: Roncesvalles he slew Roland in spite of enchantments, availing himself
LINE 69: of the artifice of Hercules when he strangled Antæus the son of Terra
LINE 70: in his arms. He approved highly of the giant Morgante, because,
LINE 71: although of the giant breed which is always arrogant and
LINE 72: ill-conditioned, he alone was affable and well-bred. But above all he
LINE 73: admired Reinaldos of Montalban, especially when he saw him sallying
LINE 74: forth from his castle and robbing everyone he met, and when beyond the
LINE 75: seas he stole that image of Mahomet which, as his history says, was
LINE 76: entirely of gold. To have a bout of kicking at that traitor of a
LINE 77: Ganelon he would have given his housekeeper, and his niece into the
LINE 78: bargain.
LINE 79: In short, his wits being quite gone, he hit upon the strangest notion
LINE 80: that ever madman in this world hit upon, and that was that he fancied
LINE 81: it was right and requisite, as well for the support of his own honour
LINE 82: as for the service of his country, that he should make a knight-errant
LINE 83: of himself, roaming the world over in full armour and on horseback in
LINE 84: quest of adventures, and putting in practice himself all that he had
LINE 85: read of as being the usual practices of knights-errant; righting every
LINE 86: kind of wrong, and exposing himself to peril and danger from which, in
LINE 87: the issue, he was to reap eternal renown and fame. Already the poor man
LINE 88: saw himself crowned by the might of his arm Emperor of Trebizond at
LINE 89: least; and so, led away by the intense enjoyment he found in these
LINE 90: pleasant fancies, he set himself forthwith to put his scheme into
LINE 91: execution.
LINE 92: The first thing he did was to clean up some armour that had belonged to
LINE 93: his great-grandfather, and had been for ages lying forgotten in a
LINE 94: corner eaten with rust and covered with mildew. He scoured and polished
LINE 95: it as best he could, but he perceived one great defect in it, that it
LINE 96: had no closed helmet, nothing but a simple morion. This deficiency,
LINE 97: however, his ingenuity supplied, for he contrived a kind of half-helmet
LINE 98: of pasteboard which, fitted on to the morion, looked like a whole one.
LINE 99: It is true that, in order to see if it was strong and fit to stand a
LINE 100: cut, he drew his sword and gave it a couple of slashes, the first of
LINE 101: which undid in an instant what had taken him a week to do. The ease
LINE 102: with which he had knocked it to pieces disconcerted him somewhat, and
LINE 103: to guard against that danger he set to work again, fixing bars of iron
LINE 104: on the inside until he was satisfied with its strength; and then, not
LINE 105: caring to try any more experiments with it, he passed it and adopted it
LINE 106: as a helmet of the most perfect construction.
LINE 107: He next proceeded to inspect his hack, which, with more quartos than a
LINE 108: real and more blemishes than the steed of Gonela, that "_tantum pellis
LINE 109: et ossa fuit_," surpassed in his eyes the Bucephalus of Alexander or
LINE 110: the Babieca of the Cid. Four days were spent in thinking what name to
LINE 111: give him, because (as he said to himself) it was not right that a horse
LINE 112: belonging to a knight so famous, and one with such merits of his own,
LINE 113: should be without some distinctive name, and he strove to adapt it so
LINE 114: as to indicate what he had been before belonging to a knight-errant,
LINE 115: and what he then was; for it was only reasonable that, his master
LINE 116: taking a new character, he should take a new name, and that it should
LINE 117: be a distinguished and full-sounding one, befitting the new order and
LINE 118: calling he was about to follow. And so, after having composed, struck
LINE 119: out, rejected, added to, unmade, and remade a multitude of names out of
LINE 120: his memory and fancy, he decided upon calling him Rocinante, a name, to
LINE 121: his thinking, lofty, sonorous, and significant of his condition as a
LINE 122: hack before he became what he now was, the first and foremost of all
LINE 123: the hacks in the world.
LINE 124: Having got a name for his horse so much to his taste, he was anxious to
LINE 125: get one for himself, and he was eight days more pondering over this
LINE 126: point, till at last he made up his mind to call himself "Don Quixote,"
LINE 127: whence, as has been already said, the authors of this veracious history
LINE 128: have inferred that his name must have been beyond a doubt Quixada, and
LINE 129: not Quesada as others would have it. Recollecting, however, that the
LINE 130: valiant Amadis was not content to call himself curtly Amadis and
LINE 131: nothing more, but added the name of his kingdom and country to make it
LINE 132: famous, and called himself Amadis of Gaul, he, like a good knight,
LINE 133: resolved to add on the name of his, and to style himself Don Quixote of
LINE 134: La Mancha, whereby, he considered, he described accurately his origin
LINE 135: and country, and did honour to it in taking his surname from it.
LINE 136: So then, his armour being furbished, his morion turned into a helmet,
LINE 137: his hack christened, and he himself confirmed, he came to the
LINE 138: conclusion that nothing more was needed now but to look out for a lady
LINE 139: to be in love with; for a knight-errant without love was like a tree
LINE 140: without leaves or fruit, or a body without a soul. As he said to
LINE 141: himself, "If, for my sins, or by my good fortune, I come across some
LINE 142: giant hereabouts, a common occurrence with knights-errant, and
LINE 143: overthrow him in one onslaught, or cleave him asunder to the waist, or,
LINE 144: in short, vanquish and subdue him, will it not be well to have someone
LINE 145: I may send him to as a present, that he may come in and fall on his
LINE 146: knees before my sweet lady, and in a humble, submissive voice say, 'I
LINE 147: am the giant Caraculiambro, lord of the island of Malindrania,
LINE 148: vanquished in single combat by the never sufficiently extolled knight
LINE 149: Don Quixote of La Mancha, who has commanded me to present myself before
LINE 150: your Grace, that your Highness dispose of me at your pleasure'?" Oh,
LINE 151: how our good gentleman enjoyed the delivery of this speech, especially
LINE 152: when he had thought of someone to call his Lady! There was, so the
LINE 153: story goes, in a village near his own a very good-looking farm-girl
LINE 154: with whom he had been at one time in love, though, so far as is known,
LINE 155: she never knew it nor gave a thought to the matter. Her name was
LINE 156: Aldonza Lorenzo, and upon her he thought fit to confer the title of
LINE 157: Lady of his Thoughts; and after some search for a name which should not
LINE 158: be out of harmony with her own, and should suggest and indicate that of
LINE 159: a princess and great lady, he decided upon calling her Dulcinea del
LINE 160: Toboso—she being of El Toboso—a name, to his mind, musical, uncommon,
LINE 161: and significant, like all those he had already bestowed upon himself
LINE 162: and the things belonging to him.
LINE 163: p007b.jpg (61K)