LINE 1: The campaign for white supremacy was dragging. Carteret had set out, in
LINE 2: the columns of the Morning Chronicle, all the reasons why this movement,
LINE 3: inaugurated by the three men who had met, six months before, at the
LINE 4: office of the Chronicle, should be supported by the white public. Negro
LINE 5: citizenship was a grotesque farce--Sambo and Dinah raised from the
LINE 6: kitchen to the cabinet were a spectacle to make the gods laugh. The laws
LINE 7: by which it had been sought to put the negroes on a level with the
LINE 8: whites must be swept away in theory, as they had failed in fact. If it
LINE 9: were impossible, without a further education of public opinion, to
LINE 10: secure the repeal of the fifteenth amendment, it was at least the solemn
LINE 11: duty of the state to endeavor, through its own constitution, to escape
LINE 12: from the domination of a weak and incompetent electorate and confine the
LINE 13: negro to that inferior condition for which nature had evidently designed
LINE 14: him.
LINE 15: In spite of the force and intelligence with which Carteret had expressed
LINE 16: these and similar views, they had not met the immediate response
LINE 17: anticipated. There were thoughtful men, willing to let well enough
LINE 18: alone, who saw no necessity for such a movement. They believed that
LINE 19: peace, prosperity, and popular education offered a surer remedy for
LINE 20: social ills than the reopening of issues supposed to have been settled.
LINE 21: There were timid men who shrank from civic strife. There were busy men,
LINE 22: who had something else to do. There were a few fair men, prepared to
LINE 23: admit, privately, that a class constituting half to two thirds of the
LINE 24: population were fairly entitled to some representation in the law-making
LINE 25: bodies. Perhaps there might have been found, somewhere in the state, a
LINE 26: single white man ready to concede that all men were entitled to equal
LINE 27: rights before the law.
LINE 28: That there were some white men who had learned little and forgotten
LINE 29: nothing goes without saying, for knowledge and wisdom are not
LINE 30: impartially distributed among even the most favored race. There were
LINE 31: ignorant and vicious negroes, and they had a monopoly of neither
LINE 32: ignorance nor crime, for there were prosperous negroes and
LINE 33: poverty-stricken whites. Until Carteret and his committee began their
LINE 34: baleful campaign the people of the state were living in peace and
LINE 35: harmony. The anti-negro legislation in more southern states, with large
LINE 36: negro majorities, had awakened scarcely an echo in this state, with a
LINE 37: population two thirds white. Even the triumph of the Fusion party had
LINE 38: not been regarded as a race issue. It remained for Carteret and his
LINE 39: friends to discover, with inspiration from whatever supernatural source
LINE 40: the discriminating reader may elect, that the darker race, docile by
LINE 41: instinct, humble by training, patiently waiting upon its as yet
LINE 42: uncertain destiny, was an incubus, a corpse chained to the body politic,
LINE 43: and that the negro vote was a source of danger to the state, no matter
LINE 44: how cast or by whom directed.
LINE 45: To discuss means for counteracting this apathy, a meeting of the "Big
LINE 46: Three," as they had begun to designate themselves jocularly, was held at
LINE 47: the office of the "Morning Chronicle," on the next day but one after
LINE 48: little Dodie's fortunate escape from the knife.
LINE 49: "It seems," said General Belmont, opening the discussion, "as though we
LINE 50: had undertaken more than we can carry through. It is clear that we must
LINE 51: reckon on opposition, both at home and abroad. If we are to hope for
LINE 52: success, we must extend the lines of our campaign. The North, as well as
LINE 53: our own people, must be convinced that we have right upon our side. We
LINE 54: are conscious of the purity of our motives, but we should avoid even the
LINE 55: appearance of evil."
LINE 56: McBane was tapping the floor impatiently with his foot during this
LINE 57: harangue.
LINE 58: "I don't see the use," he interrupted, "of so much beating about the
LINE 59: bush. We may as well be honest about this thing. We are going to put the
LINE 60: niggers down because we want to, and think we can; so why waste our time
LINE 61: in mere pretense? I'm no hypocrite myself,--if I want a thing I take it,
LINE 62: provided I'm strong enough."
LINE 63: "My dear captain," resumed the general, with biting suavity, "your
LINE 64: frankness does you credit,--'an honest man's the noblest work of
LINE 65: God,'--but we cannot carry on politics in these degenerate times without
LINE 66: a certain amount of diplomacy. In the good old days when your father was
LINE 67: alive, and perhaps nowadays in the discipline of convicts, direct and
LINE 68: simple methods might be safely resorted to; but this is a modern age,
LINE 69: and in dealing with so fundamental a right as the suffrage we must
LINE 70: profess a decent regard for the opinions of even that misguided portion
LINE 71: of mankind which may not agree with us. This is the age of crowds, and
LINE 72: we must have the crowd with us." The captain flushed at the allusion
LINE 73: to his father's calling, at which he took more offense than at the
LINE 74: mention of his own. He knew perfectly well that these old aristocrats,
LINE 75: while reaping the profits of slavery, had despised the instruments by
LINE 76: which they were attained--the poor-white overseer only less than the
LINE 77: black slave. McBane was rich; he lived in Wellington, but he had never
LINE 78: been invited to the home of either General Belmont or Major Carteret,
LINE 79: nor asked to join the club of which they were members. His face,
LINE 80: therefore, wore a distinct scowl, and his single eye glowed ominously.
LINE 81: He would help these fellows carry the state for white supremacy, and
LINE 82: then he would have his innings,--he would have more to say than they
LINE 83: dreamed, as to who should fill the offices under the new deal. Men of no
LINE 84: better birth or breeding than he had represented Southern states in
LINE 85: Congress since the war. Why should he not run for governor,
LINE 86: representative, whatever he chose? He had money enough to buy out half a
LINE 87: dozen of these broken-down aristocrats, and money was all-powerful.
LINE 88: "You see, captain," the general went on, looking McBane smilingly and
LINE 89: unflinchingly in the eye, "we need white immigration--we need Northern
LINE 90: capital. 'A good name is better than great riches,' and we must prove
LINE 91: our cause a righteous one."
LINE 92: "We must be armed at all points," added Carteret, "and prepared for
LINE 93: defense as well as for attack,--we must make our campaign a national
LINE 94: one."
LINE 95: "For instance," resumed the general, "you, Carteret, represent the
LINE 96: Associated Press. Through your hands passes all the news of the state.
LINE 97: What more powerful medium for the propagation of an idea? The man who
LINE 98: would govern a nation by writing its songs was a blethering idiot beside
LINE 99: the fellow who can edit its news dispatches. The negroes are playing
LINE 100: into our hands,--every crime that one of them commits is reported by us.
LINE 101: With the latitude they have had in this state they are growing more
LINE 102: impudent and self-assertive every day. A yellow demagogue in New York
LINE 103: made a speech only a few days ago, in which he deliberately, and in cold
LINE 104: blood, advised negroes to defend themselves to the death when attacked
LINE 105: by white people! I remember well the time when it was death for a negro
LINE 106: to strike a white man."
LINE 107: "It's death now, if he strikes the right one," interjected McBane,
LINE 108: restored to better humor by this mention of a congenial subject.
LINE 109: The general smiled a fine smile. He had heard the story of how McBane
LINE 110: had lost his other eye.
LINE 111: "The local negro paper is quite outspoken, too," continued the general,
LINE 112: "if not impudent. We must keep track of that; it may furnish us some
LINE 113: good campaign material."
LINE 114: "Yes," returned Carteret, "we must see to that. I threw a copy into the
LINE 115: waste-basket this morning, without looking at it. Here it is now!"