LINE 1: Ellis left the office of the Morning Chronicle about eleven o'clock the
LINE 2: same evening and set out to walk home. His boarding-house was only a
LINE 3: short distance beyond old Mr. Delamere's residence, and while he might
LINE 4: have saved time and labor by a slightly shorter route, he generally
LINE 5: selected this one because it led also by Major Carteret's house.
LINE 6: Sometimes there would be a ray of light from Clara's room, which was on
LINE 7: one of the front corners; and at any rate he would have the pleasure of
LINE 8: gazing at the outside of the casket that enshrined the jewel of his
LINE 9: heart. It was true that this purely sentimental pleasure was sometimes
LINE 10: dashed with bitterness at the thought of his rival; but one in love must
LINE 11: take the bitter with the sweet, and who would say that a spice of
LINE 12: jealousy does not add a certain zest to love? On this particular
LINE 13: evening, however, he was in a hopeful mood. At the Clarendon Club, where
LINE 14: he had gone, a couple of hours before, to verify a certain news item for
LINE 15: the morning paper, he had heard a story about Tom Delamere which, he
LINE 16: imagined, would spike that gentleman's guns for all time, so far as Miss
LINE 17: Pemberton was concerned. So grave an affair as cheating at cards could
LINE 18: never be kept secret,--it was certain to reach her ears; and Ellis was
LINE 19: morally certain that Clara would never marry a man who had been proved
LINE 20: dishonorable. In all probability there would be no great sensation
LINE 21: about the matter. Delamere was too well connected; too many prominent
LINE 22: people would be involved--even Clara, and the editor himself, of whom
LINE 23: Delamere was a distant cousin. The reputation of the club was also to be
LINE 24: considered. Ellis was not the man to feel a malicious delight in the
LINE 25: misfortunes of another, nor was he a pessimist who welcomed scandal and
LINE 26: disgrace with open arms, as confirming a gloomy theory of human life.
LINE 27: But, with the best intentions in the world, it was no more than human
LINE 28: nature that he should feel a certain elation in the thought that his
LINE 29: rival had been practically disposed of, and the field left clear;
LINE 30: especially since this good situation had been brought about merely by
LINE 31: the unmasking of a hypocrite, who had held him at an unfair disadvantage
LINE 32: in the race for Clara's favor.
LINE 33: The night was quiet, except for the faint sound of distant music now and
LINE 34: then, or the mellow laughter of some group of revelers. Ellis met but
LINE 35: few pedestrians, but as he neared old Mr. Delamere's, he saw two men
LINE 36: walking in the same direction as his own, on the opposite side of the
LINE 37: street. He had observed that they kept at about an equal distance apart,
LINE 38: and that the second, from the stealthy manner in which he was making his
LINE 39: way, was anxious to keep the first in sight, without disclosing his own
LINE 40: presence. This aroused Ellis's curiosity, which was satisfied in some
LINE 41: degree when the man in advance stopped beneath a lamp-post and stood for
LINE 42: a moment looking across the street, with his face plainly visible in the
LINE 43: yellow circle of light. It was a dark face, and Ellis recognized it
LINE 44: instantly as that of old Mr. Delamere's body servant, whose personal
LINE 45: appearance had been very vividly impressed upon Ellis at the
LINE 46: christening dinner at Major Carteret's. He had seen Sandy once since,
LINE 47: too, at the hotel cakewalk. The negro had a small bundle in his hand,
LINE 48: the nature of which Ellis could not make out.
LINE 49: When Sandy had stopped beneath the lamp-post, the man who was following
LINE 50: him had dodged behind a tree-trunk. When Sandy moved on, Ellis, who had
LINE 51: stopped in turn, saw the man in hiding come out and follow Sandy. When
LINE 52: this second man came in range of the light, Ellis wondered that there
LINE 53: should be two men so much alike. The first of the two had undoubtedly
LINE 54: been Sandy. Ellis had recognized the peculiar, old-fashioned coat that
LINE 55: Sandy had worn upon the two occasions when he had noticed him. Barring
LINE 56: this difference, and the somewhat unsteady gait of the second man, the
LINE 57: two were as much alike as twin brothers.
LINE 58: When they had entered Mr. Delamere's house, one after the other,--in the
LINE 59: stillness of the night Ellis could perceive that each of them tried to
LINE 60: make as little noise as possible,--Ellis supposed that they were
LINE 61: probably relatives, both employed as servants, or that some younger
LINE 62: negro, taking Sandy for a model, was trying to pattern himself after his
LINE 63: superior. Why all this mystery, of course he could not imagine, unless
LINE 64: the younger man had been out without permission and was trying to avoid
LINE 65: the accusing eye of Sandy. Ellis was vaguely conscious that he had seen
LINE 66: the other negro somewhere, but he could not for the moment place
LINE 67: him,--there were so many negroes, nearly three negroes to one white man
LINE 68: in the city of Wellington!
LINE 69: The subject, however, while curious, was not important as compared with
LINE 70: the thoughts of his sweetheart which drove it from his mind. Clara had
LINE 71: been kind to him the night before,--whatever her motive, she had been
LINE 72: kind, and could not consistently return to her attitude of coldness.
LINE 73: With Delamere hopelessly discredited, Ellis hoped to have at least fair
LINE 74: play,--with fair play, he would take his chances of the outcome.