LINE 1: On Friday morning, when old Mrs. Ochiltree's cook Dinah went to wake her
LINE 2: mistress, she was confronted with a sight that well-nigh blanched her
LINE 3: ebony cheek and caused her eyes almost to start from her head with
LINE 4: horror. As soon as she could command her trembling limbs sufficiently to
LINE 5: make them carry her, she rushed out of the house and down the street,
LINE 6: bareheaded, covering in an incredibly short time the few blocks that
LINE 7: separated Mrs. Ochiltree's residence from that of her niece.
LINE 8: She hastened around the house, and finding the back door open and the
LINE 9: servants stirring, ran into the house and up the stairs with the
LINE 10: familiarity of an old servant, not stopping until she reached the door
LINE 11: of Mrs. Carteret's chamber, at which she knocked in great agitation.
LINE 12: Entering in response to Mrs. Carteret's invitation, she found the lady,
LINE 13: dressed in a simple wrapper, superintending the morning toilet of little
LINE 14: Dodie, who was a wakeful child, and insisted upon rising with the birds,
LINE 15: for whose music he still showed a great fondness, in spite of his narrow
LINE 16: escape while listening to the mockingbird.
LINE 17: "What is it, Dinah?" asked Mrs. Carteret, alarmed at the frightened face
LINE 18: of her aunt's old servitor.
LINE 19: "O my Lawd, Mis' 'Livy, my Lawd, my Lawd! My legs is trim'lin' so dat I
LINE 20: can't ha'dly hol' my han's stiddy 'nough ter say w'at I got ter say! O
LINE 21: Lawd have mussy on us po' sinners! W'atever is gwine ter happen in dis
LINE 22: worl' er sin an' sorrer!"
LINE 23: "What in the world is the matter, Dinah?" demanded Mrs. Carteret, whose
LINE 24: own excitement had increased with the length of this preamble. "Has
LINE 25: anything happened to Aunt Polly?"
LINE 26: "Somebody done broke in de house las' night, Mis' 'Livy, an' kill' Mis'
LINE 27: Polly, an' lef' her layin' dead on de flo', in her own blood, wid her
LINE 28: cedar chis' broke' open, an' eve'thing scattered roun' de flo'! O my
LINE 29: Lawd, my Lawd, my Lawd, my Lawd!"
LINE 30: Mrs. Carteret was shocked beyond expression. Perhaps the spectacle of
LINE 31: Dinah's unrestrained terror aided her to retain a greater measure of
LINE 32: self-control than she might otherwise have been capable of. Giving the
LINE 33: nurse some directions in regard to the child, she hastily descended the
LINE 34: stairs, and seizing a hat and jacket from the rack in the hall, ran
LINE 35: immediately with Dinah to the scene of the tragedy. Before the thought
LINE 36: of this violent death all her aunt's faults faded into insignificance,
LINE 37: and only her good qualities were remembered. She had reared Olivia; she
LINE 38: had stood up for the memory of Olivia's mother when others had seemed to
LINE 39: forget what was due to it. To her niece she had been a second mother,
LINE 40: and had never been lacking in affection.
LINE 41: More than one motive, however, lent wings to Mrs. Carteret's feet. Her
LINE 42: aunt's incomplete disclosures on the day of the drive past the hospital
LINE 43: had been weighing upon Mrs. Carteret's mind, and she had intended to
LINE 44: make another effort this very day, to get an answer to her question
LINE 45: about the papers which the woman had claimed were in existence. Suppose
LINE 46: her aunt had really found such papers,--papers which would seem to prove
LINE 47: the preposterous claim made by her father's mulatto mistress? Suppose
LINE 48: that, with the fatuity which generally leads human beings to keep
LINE 49: compromising documents, her aunt had preserved these papers? If they
LINE 50: should be found there in the house, there might be a scandal, if nothing
LINE 51: worse, and this was to be avoided at all hazards.
LINE 52: Guided by some fortunate instinct, Dinah had as yet informed no one but
LINE 53: Mrs. Carteret of her discovery. If they could reach the house before the
LINE 54: murder became known to any third person, she might be the first to
LINE 55: secure access to the remaining contents of the cedar chest, which would
LINE 56: be likely to be held as evidence in case the officers of the law
LINE 57: forestalled her own arrival.
LINE 58: They found the house wrapped in the silence of death. Mrs. Carteret
LINE 59: entered the chamber of the dead woman. Upon the floor, where it had
LINE 60: fallen, lay the body in a pool of blood, the strongly marked countenance
LINE 61: scarcely more grim in the rigidity of death than it had been in life. A
LINE 62: gaping wound in the head accounted easily for the death. The cedar chest
LINE 63: stood open, its strong fastenings having been broken by a steel bar
LINE 64: which still lay beside it. Near it were scattered pieces of old lace,
LINE 65: antiquated jewelry, tarnished silverware,--the various mute souvenirs of
LINE 66: the joys and sorrows of a long and active life.
LINE 67: Kneeling by the open chest, Mrs. Carteret glanced hurriedly through its
LINE 68: contents. There were no papers there except a few old deeds and letters.
LINE 69: She had risen with a sigh of relief, when she perceived the end of a
LINE 70: paper projecting from beneath the edge of a rug which had been
LINE 71: carelessly rumpled, probably by the burglar in his hasty search for
LINE 72: plunder. This paper, or sealed envelope as it proved to be, which
LINE 73: evidently contained some inclosure, she seized, and at the sound of
LINE 74: approaching footsteps thrust hastily into her own bosom.
LINE 75: The sight of two agitated women rushing through the quiet streets at so
LINE 76: early an hour in the morning had attracted attention and aroused
LINE 77: curiosity, and the story of the murder, having once become known, spread
LINE 78: with the customary rapidity of bad news. Very soon a policeman, and a
LINE 79: little later a sheriff's officer, arrived at the house and took charge
LINE 80: of the remains to await the arrival of the coroner.
LINE 81: By nine o'clock a coroner's jury had been summoned, who, after brief
LINE 82: deliberation, returned a verdict of willful murder at the hands of some
LINE 83: person or persons unknown, while engaged in the commission of a
LINE 84: burglary.
LINE 85: No sooner was the verdict announced than the community, or at least the
LINE 86: white third of it, resolved itself spontaneously into a committee of the
LINE 87: whole to discover the perpetrator of this dastardly crime, which, at
LINE 88: this stage of the affair, seemed merely one of robbery and murder.
LINE 89: Suspicion was at once directed toward the negroes, as it always is when
LINE 90: an unexplained crime is committed in a Southern community. The suspicion
LINE 91: was not entirely an illogical one. Having been, for generations, trained
LINE 92: up to thriftlessness, theft, and immorality, against which only thirty
LINE 93: years of very limited opportunity can be offset, during which brief
LINE 94: period they have been denied in large measure the healthful social
LINE 95: stimulus and sympathy which holds most men in the path of rectitude,
LINE 96: colored people might reasonably be expected to commit at least a share
LINE 97: of crime proportionate to their numbers. The population of the town was
LINE 98: at least two thirds colored. The chances were, therefore, in the absence
LINE 99: of evidence, at least two to one that a man of color had committed the
LINE 100: crime. The Southern tendency to charge the negroes with all the crime
LINE 101: and immorality of that region, unjust and exaggerated as the claim may
LINE 102: be, was therefore not without a logical basis to the extent above
LINE 103: indicated.
LINE 104: It must not be imagined that any logic was needed, or any reasoning
LINE 105: consciously worked out. The mere suggestion that the crime had been
LINE 106: committed by a negro was equivalent to proof against any negro that
LINE 107: might be suspected and could not prove his innocence. A committee of
LINE 108: white men was hastily formed. Acting independently of the police force,
LINE 109: which was practically ignored as likely to favor the negroes, this
LINE 110: committee set to work to discover the murderer.
LINE 111: The spontaneous activity of the whites was accompanied by a visible
LINE 112: shrinkage of the colored population. This could not be taken as any
LINE 113: indication of guilt, but was merely a recognition of the palpable fact
LINE 114: that the American habit of lynching had so whetted the thirst for black
LINE 115: blood that a negro suspected of crime had to face at least the
LINE 116: possibility of a short shrift and a long rope, not to mention more
LINE 117: gruesome horrors, without the intervention of judge or jury. Since to
LINE 118: have a black face at such a time was to challenge suspicion, and since
LINE 119: there was neither the martyr's glory nor the saint's renown in being
LINE 120: killed for some one else's crime, and very little hope of successful
LINE 121: resistance in case of an attempt at lynching, it was obviously the part
LINE 122: of prudence for those thus marked to seek immunity in a temporary
LINE 123: disappearance from public view.