LINE 1: Miller's doorbell rang loudly, insistently, as though demanding a
LINE 2: response. Absorbed in his own grief, into which he had relapsed upon
LINE 3: Carteret's departure, the sound was an unwelcome intrusion. Surely the
LINE 4: man could not be coming back! If it were some one else--What else might
LINE 5: happen to the doomed town concerned him not. His child was dead,--his
LINE 6: distracted wife could not be left alone.
LINE 7: The doorbell rang--clamorously--appealingly. Through the long hall and
LINE 8: the closed door of the room where he sat, he could hear some one
LINE 9: knocking, and a faint voice calling.
LINE 10: "Open, for God's sake, open!"
LINE 11: It was a woman's voice,--the voice of a woman in distress. Slowly Miller
LINE 12: rose and went to the door, which he opened mechanically.
LINE 13: A lady stood there, so near the image of his own wife, whom he had just
LINE 14: left, that for a moment he was well-nigh startled. A little older,
LINE 15: perhaps, a little fairer of complexion, but with the same form, the same
LINE 16: features, marked by the same wild grief. She wore a loose wrapper, which
LINE 17: clothed her like the drapery of a statue. Her long dark hair, the
LINE 18: counterpart of his wife's, had fallen down, and hung disheveled about
LINE 19: her shoulders. There was blood upon her knuckles, where she had beaten
LINE 20: with them upon the door. "Dr. Miller," she panted, breathless from her
LINE 21: flight and laying her hand upon his arm appealingly,--when he shrank
LINE 22: from the contact she still held it there,--"Dr. Miller, you will come
LINE 23: and save my child? You know what it is to lose a child! I am so sorry
LINE 24: about your little boy! You will come to mine!"
LINE 25: "Your sorrow comes too late, madam," he said harshly. "My child is dead.
LINE 26: I charged your husband with his murder, and he could not deny it. Why
LINE 27: should I save your husband's child?"
LINE 28: "Ah, Dr. Miller!" she cried, with his wife's voice,--she never knew how
LINE 29: much, in that dark hour, she owed to that resemblance--"it is _my_
LINE 30: child, and I have never injured you. It is my child, Dr. Miller, my only
LINE 31: child. I brought it into the world at the risk of my own life! I have
LINE 32: nursed it, I have watched over it, I have prayed for it,--and it now
LINE 33: lies dying! Oh, Dr. Miller, dear Dr. Miller, if you have a heart, come
LINE 34: and save my child!"
LINE 35: "Madam," he answered more gently, moved in spite of himself, "my heart
LINE 36: is broken. My people lie dead upon the streets, at the hands of yours.
LINE 37: The work of my life is in ashes,--and, yonder, stretched out in death,
LINE 38: lies my own child! God! woman, you ask too much of human nature! Love,
LINE 39: duty, sorrow, _justice_, call me here. I cannot go!"
LINE 40: She rose to her full height. "Then you are a murderer," she cried
LINE 41: wildly. "His blood be on your head, and a mother's curse beside!"
LINE 42: The next moment, with a sudden revulsion of feeling, she had thrown
LINE 43: herself at his feet,--at the feet of a negro, this proud white
LINE 44: woman,--and was clasping his knees wildly.
LINE 45: "O God!" she prayed, in tones which quivered with anguish, "pardon my
LINE 46: husband's sins, and my own, and move this man's hard heart, by the blood
LINE 47: of thy Son, who died to save us all!"
LINE 48: It was the last appeal of poor humanity. When the pride of intellect and
LINE 49: caste is broken; when we grovel in the dust of humiliation; when
LINE 50: sickness and sorrow come, and the shadow of death falls upon us, and
LINE 51: there is no hope elsewhere,--we turn to God, who sometimes swallows the
LINE 52: insult, and answers the appeal.
LINE 53: Miller raised the lady to her feet. He had been deeply moved,--but he
LINE 54: had been more deeply injured. This was his wife's sister,--ah, yes! but
LINE 55: a sister who had scorned and slighted and ignored the existence of his
LINE 56: wife for all her life. Only Miller, of all the world, could have guessed
LINE 57: what this had meant to Janet, and he had merely divined it through the
LINE 58: clairvoyant sympathy of love. This woman could have no claim upon him
LINE 59: because of this unacknowledged relationship. Yet, after all, she was his
LINE 60: wife's sister, his child's kinswoman. She was a fellow creature, too,
LINE 61: and in distress.
LINE 62: "Rise, madam," he said, with a sudden inspiration, lifting her gently.
LINE 63: "I will listen to you on one condition. My child lies dead in the
LINE 64: adjoining room, his mother by his side. Go in there, and make your
LINE 65: request of her. I will abide by her decision."
LINE 66: The two women stood confronting each other across the body of the dead
LINE 67: child, mute witness of this first meeting between two children of the
LINE 68: same father. Standing thus face to face, each under the stress of the
LINE 69: deepest emotions, the resemblance between them was even more striking
LINE 70: than it had seemed to Miller when he had admitted Mrs. Carteret to the
LINE 71: house. But Death, the great leveler, striking upon the one hand and
LINE 72: threatening upon the other, had wrought a marvelous transformation in
LINE 73: the bearing of the two women. The sad-eyed Janet towered erect, with
LINE 74: menacing aspect, like an avenging goddess. The other, whose pride had
LINE 75: been her life, stood in the attitude of a trembling suppliant.
LINE 76: "_You_ have come here," cried Janet, pointing with a tragic gesture to
LINE 77: the dead child,--"_you_, to gloat over your husband's work. All my life
LINE 78: you have hated and scorned and despised me. Your presence here insults
LINE 79: me and my dead. What are you doing here?"
LINE 80: "Mrs. Miller," returned Mrs. Carteret tremulously, dazed for a moment by
LINE 81: this outburst, and clasping her hands with an imploring gesture, "my
LINE 82: child, my only child, is dying, and your husband alone can save his
LINE 83: life. Ah, let me have my child," she moaned, heart-rendingly. "It is my
LINE 84: only one--my sweet child--my ewe lamb!"
LINE 85: "This was _my_ only child!" replied the other mother; "and yours is no
LINE 86: better to die than mine!"
LINE 87: "You are young," said Mrs. Carteret, "and may yet have many
LINE 88: children,--this is my only hope! If you have a human heart, tell your
LINE 89: husband to come with me. He leaves it to you; he will do as you
LINE 90: command."
LINE 91: "Ah," cried Janet, "I have a human heart, and therefore I will not let
LINE 92: him go. _My_ child is dead--O God, my child, my child!"
LINE 93: She threw herself down by the bedside, sobbing hysterically. The other
LINE 94: woman knelt beside her, and put her arm about her neck. For a moment
LINE 95: Janet, absorbed in her grief, did not repulse her. "Listen," pleaded
LINE 96: Mrs. Carteret. "You will not let my baby die? You are my sister;--the
LINE 97: child is your own near kin!"
LINE 98: "My child was nearer," returned Janet, rising again to her feet and
LINE 99: shaking off the other woman's arm. "He was my son, and I have seen him
LINE 100: die. I have been your sister for twenty-five years, and you have only
LINE 101: now, for the first time, called me so!"
LINE 102: "Listen--sister," returned Mrs. Carteret. Was there no way to move this
LINE 103: woman? Her child lay dying, if he were not dead already. She would tell
LINE 104: everything, and leave the rest to God. If it would save her child, she
LINE 105: would shrink at no sacrifice. Whether the truth would still further
LINE 106: incense Janet, or move her to mercy, she could not tell; she would leave
LINE 107: the issue to God.
LINE 108: "Listen, sister!" she said. "I have a confession to make. You are my
LINE 109: lawful sister. My father was married to your mother. You are entitled to
LINE 110: his name, and to half his estate."
LINE 111: Janet's eyes flashed with bitter scorn.
LINE 112: "And you have robbed me all these years, and now tell me that as a
LINE 113: reason why I should forgive the murder of my child?"
LINE 114: "No, no!" cried the other wildly, fearing the worst. "I have known of it
LINE 115: only a few weeks,--since my Aunt Polly's death. I had not meant to rob
LINE 116: you,--I had meant to make restitution. Sister! for our father's sake,
LINE 117: who did you no wrong, give me my child's life!"
LINE 118: Janet's eyes slowly filled with tears--bitter tears--burning tears. For
LINE 119: a moment even her grief at her child's loss dropped to second place in
LINE 120: her thoughts. This, then, was the recognition for which, all her life,
LINE 121: she had longed in secret. It had come, after many days, and in larger
LINE 122: measure than she had dreamed; but it had come, not with frank kindliness
LINE 123: and sisterly love, but in a storm of blood and tears; not freely given,
LINE 124: from an open heart, but extorted from a reluctant conscience by the
LINE 125: agony of a mother's fears. Janet had obtained her heart's desire, and
LINE 126: now that it was at her lips, found it but apples of Sodom, filled with
LINE 127: dust and ashes!
LINE 128: "Listen!" she cried, dashing her tears aside. "I have but one word for
LINE 129: you,--one last word,--and then I hope never to see your face again! My
LINE 130: mother died of want, and I was brought up by the hand of charity. Now,
LINE 131: when I have married a man who can supply my needs, you offer me back the
LINE 132: money which you and your friends have robbed me of! You imagined that
LINE 133: the shame of being a negro swallowed up every other ignominy,--and in
LINE 134: your eyes I am a negro, though I am your sister, and you are white, and
LINE 135: people have taken me for you on the streets,--and you, therefore, left
LINE 136: me nameless all my life! Now, when an honest man has given me a name of
LINE 137: which I can be proud, you offer me the one of which you robbed me, and
LINE 138: of which I can make no use. For twenty-five years I, poor, despicable
LINE 139: fool, would have kissed your feet for a word, a nod, a smile. Now, when
LINE 140: this tardy recognition comes, for which I have waited so long, it is
LINE 141: tainted with fraud and crime and blood, and I must pay for it with my
LINE 142: child's life!"
LINE 143: "And I must forfeit that of mine, it seems, for withholding it so long,"
LINE 144: sobbed the other, as, tottering, she turned to go. "It is but just."
LINE 145: "Stay--do not go yet!" commanded Janet imperiously, her pride still
LINE 146: keeping back her tears. "I have not done. I throw you back your
LINE 147: father's name, your father's wealth, your sisterly recognition. I want
LINE 148: none of them,--they are bought too dear! ah, God, they are bought too
LINE 149: dear! But that you may know that a woman may be foully wronged, and yet
LINE 150: may have a heart to feel, even for one who has injured her, you may have
LINE 151: your child's life, if my husband can save it! Will," she said, throwing
LINE 152: open the door into the next room, "go with her!"
LINE 153: "God will bless you for a noble woman!" exclaimed Mrs. Carteret. "You do
LINE 154: not mean all the cruel things you have said,--ah, no! I will see you
LINE 155: again, and make you take them back; I cannot thank you now! Oh, doctor,
LINE 156: let us go! I pray God we may not be too late!"
LINE 157: Together they went out into the night. Mrs. Carteret tottered under the
LINE 158: stress of her emotions, and would have fallen, had not Miller caught and
LINE 159: sustained her with his arm until they reached the house, where he turned
LINE 160: over her fainting form to Carteret at the door.
LINE 161: "Is the child still alive?" asked Miller.
LINE 162: "Yes, thank God," answered the father, "but nearly gone."
LINE 163: "Come on up, Dr. Miller," called Evans from the head of the stairs.
LINE 164: "There's time enough, but none to spare."